abiogenesis  Early
theory that held that some organisms originated from nonliving
material. abnormal
hemoglobin  Hemoglobin
molecule with a different shape due to an altered amino
acid sequence (ultimately caused by an
altered DNA base sequence), such as in the inherited disease
sickle-cell
anemia. abscisic
acid  A plant hormone
that promotes dormancy in perennial
plants and causes rapid closure of leaf stomata
when a leaf begins to wilt. absolute time
One of the two types of geologic time (relative
time being the other), with a definite age
date established mostly by the decay of radioactive elements,
although ages may also be obtained by counting tree rings, decay of a
specific type of atom, or annual sedimentary layers (such as varves
in lakes or layers in a glacier). The term is in some disfavor
because it suggests an exactness that may not be possible to
obtain. absorption  The
process by which the products of digestion
are transferred into the body's internal environment, enabling them
to reach the cells. absorptive
feeders  Animals such as tapeworms that ingest food
through the body wall. acetylcholine  A
chemical released at neuromuscular junctions that binds to receptors
on the surface of the plasma membrane of muscle cells, causing an
electrical impulse to be transmitted. The impulse ultimately leads to
muscle contraction. acetyl
CoA  An intermediate compound formed during the
breakdown of glucose
by adding a two-carbon fragment to a carrier molecule (Coenzyme A or
CoA). acid  A
substance that increases the number of hydrogen ions in a
solution. acid
rain  The precipitation of sulfuric acid and other
acids as rain. The acids form when sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides
released during the combustion of fossil fuels combine with water and
oxygen in the atmosphere.  acoelomates  Animals
that do not have a coelom
or body cavity; e.g., sponges and flatworms. acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)  A collection of
disorders that develop as a result of infection by the
human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which
attacks helper
T cells, crippling the immune system and
greatly reducing the body's ability to fight infection; results in
premature death brought about by various diseases that overwhelm the
compromised immune system.  actin  The
protein
from which microfilaments
are composed; forms the contractile filaments of sarcomeres
in muscle cells.  action
potential  A reversal of the electrical potential in
the plasma membrane of a neuron
that occurs when a nerve cell is stimulated; caused by rapid changes
in membrane permeability to sodium and potassium. active
transport  Transport of molecules against a
concentration gradient (from regions of low concentration to regions
of high concentration) with the aid of proteins in the cell membrane
and energy from ATP.
 adaptation Tendency
of an organism to suit its environment; one of the major points of
Charles Darwin's theory of evolution by natural
selection: organisms adapt to their
environment. Those organisms best adapted will have a greater chance
of surviving and passing their genes
on to the next generation. adaptive
radiation  The development of a variety of species from
a single ancestral form; occurs when a new habitat becomes available
to a population.
Evolutionary pattern of divergence
of a great many taxa from a common ancestral species as a result of
novel adaptations or a recent mass
extinction. Examples: mammals during the
Cenozoic
Era after the extinction of dinosaurs at
the close of the Mesozoic
Era flowering plants during the Cretaceous
Period diversified because of their reproductive advantages over
gymnosperm
and non-seed plants that dominated the floras of the world at that
time. adenine  One of the
four nitrogen-containing bases occurring in nucleotides,
the building blocks of the organic macromolecule group known as
nucleic
acids (DNA and RNA). Adenine is also the
base in the energy carrying molecule ATP (adenosine triphosphate)
which is the energy coin of the cell.  adenosine
diphosphate (ADP)  Lower energy form of ATP, having two (instead
of the three in ATP) phosphhate groups attached to the adenine base
and ribose sugar.  adhesion  The
ability of molecules of one substance to adhere to a different
substance. adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH)  A hormone produced by the anterior
pituitary that stimulates the adrenal cortex to release several
hormones including cortisol. adventitious
roots  Roots that develop from the stem following the
death of the primary root. Branches from the adventitious roots form
a fibrous
root system in which all roots are about
the same size; occur in monocots. age
structure  The relative proportion of individuals in
each age group in a population. aggregates  Fairly
random associations of animals with little or no internal
organization; form in response to a single stimulus and disperse when
the stimulus is removed; one of the three broad classes of social
organization. albinism  Genetic
condition caused by the body's inability to manufacture pigments; an
autosomal
recessive trait. aldosterone  A
hormone
secreted by the adrenal glands that controls the reabsorption of
sodium in the renal
tubule of the nephron. alleles  Alternate
forms of a gene. allergens  Antigens
that provoke an allergic reaction. alpha decay Type
of radioactive
decay in which a radioisotope
emits a large but slow-moving particle consisting of two protons and
two neutrons.  alternation
of generations  A life cycle in which a multicellular
diploid
stage is followed by a haploid
stage and so on; found in land plants and many algae and fungi.

1 | 
2 altitudinal
gradient  As altitude increases, a gradient of cooler,
drier conditions occurs.  alveoli  Tiny,
thin-walled, inflatable sacs in the lungs
where oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged. amensalism  A
symbiotic
relationship in which members of one population inhibit the growth of
another population without being affected. amino
acids  The subunits (monomers)
from which proteins
(polymers)
are assembled. Each amino acid consists of an amino functional group,
and a carboxyl acid group, and differs from other amino acids by the
composition of an R group.  amino acid
sequence  Also known as the primary
structure of a protein/polypeptide; the
sequence of amino acids in a protein/polypeptide controlled by the
sequence of DNA bases.  amniocentesis  A
method of prenatal testing in which amniotic fluid is withdrawn from
the uterus through a needle. The fluid and the fetal cells it
contains are analyzed to detect biochemical or chromosomal
disorders. amniote
egg  An egg with compartmentalized sacs (a
liquid-filled sac in which the embryo
develops, a food sac, and a waste sac) that allowed vertebrates
to reproduce on land. amoebocytes  Amoeboid
cells in sponges that occur in the matrix between the epidermal and
collar cells. They transport nutrients. amphibians  Class of
terrestrial vertebrates
which lay their eggs (and also mate) in water but live on land as
adults following a juvenile stage where they live in water and
breathe through gills. Amphibians were the first group of land
vertebrates; today they are mostly restricted to moist
habitats. anabolic
reactions  Reactions in cells in which new chemical
bonds are formed and new molecules are made; generally require
energy, involve reduction,
and lead to an increase in atomic order. anaerobic  Refers
to organisms that are not dependent on oxygen for respiration. analogous
structures  Body parts that serve the same function in
different organisms, but differ in structure and embryological
development; e. g., the wings of insects and birds. anaphase  Phase
of mitosis
in which the chromosomes
begin to separate.  anaphylactic
shock  See anaphylaxis. anaphylaxis  A
severe allergic reaction in which histamine
is released into the circulatory system; occurs upon subsequent
exposure to a particular antigen;
also called anaphylactic shock. androecium
Collective term applied to all of the male (stamen)
parts of the flower.  aneuploidy  Variation
in chromosome number involving one or a small number of chromosomes;
commonly involves the gain or loss of a single chromosome. angina  Chest
pain, especially during physical exertion or emotional stress, that
is caused by gradual blockage of the coronary
arteries. angiosperms  Flowering
plants. First appearing at least 110 million years ago from an
unknown gymnosperm
ancestor, flowering planbts have risen to dominance in most of the
world's floras. The male gametophyte
is 2-3 cells contained within a pollen
grain; the female gametophyte is usually eight cells contained within
an ovule
which is retaind on the sporophyte
phase of the plant's life cycle. Animalia  Animal
Kingdom. Multicellular eukaryotic
group characterized by heterotrophic
nutritional mode, usually organ and tissue development, and motility
sometime during the organism's life history.  antagonistic
muscles  A pair of muscles that work to produce
opposite effects&emdash;one contracts as the other relaxes: for
example, the bicep and tricep muscles on opposite sides of your upper
arm.  anther  The
top of a stamen's filament; divided into pollen
sacs in which the pollen grains form. 
1 | 
2 antibiotics  Substances
produced by some microorganisms, plants, and vertebrates that kill or
inhibit the growth of bacteria.  antibiotic
resistance Tendency of certain bacteria to develop a resistance
to commonly over-used antibiotics.  antibodies  Proteins
produced by immune system cells that bind to foreign molecules and
microorganisms and inactivate them.  antibody-mediated
immunity  Immune reaction that protects primarily
against invading viruses and bacteria through antibodies produced by
plasma
cells; also known as humoral
immunity. anticodon  A
sequence of three nucleotides
on the transfer
RNA molecule that recognizes and pairs
with a specific codon
on a messenger
RNA molecule; helps control the sequence
of amino acids in a growing polypeptide chain.  antidiuretic
hormone (ADH)  A hormone
produced by the hypothalamus
and released by the pituitary
gland that increases the permeability of
the renal
tubule of the nephron
and thereby increases water reabsorption; also known as
vasopressin. antigenic
determinant  The site on an antigen
to which an antibody
binds, forming an antigen-antibody complex. antigens  Molecules
carried or produced by microorganisms that initiate antibody
production; mostly proteins
or proteins combined with polysaccharides. antinutrients  Chemicals
produced by plants as a defense mechanism; inhibit the action of
digestive enzymes in insects that attack and attempt to eat the
plants. anus  The
posterior opening of the digestive tract. aorta  The
artery
that carries blood from the left ventricle
for distribution throughout the tissues of the body. The largest
diameter and thickest walled artery in the body.  apical
meristem  A meristem
(embryonic tissue) at the tip of a shoot or root that is responsible
for increasing the plant's length.  apnea  A
disorder in which breathing stops for periods longer than 10 seconds
during sleep; can be caused by failure of the automatic respiratory
center to respond to elevated blood levels of carbon
dioxide. apocrine
glands  Sweat glands that are located primarily in the
armpits and groin area; larger than the more widely distributed
eccrine
glands. appendicular
skeleton  The bones of the appendages (wings, legs, and
arms or fins) and of the pelvic and pectoral girdles that join the
appendages to the rest of the skeleton; one of the two components of
the skeleton of vertebrates. appendix  Blind sac at
the end of the large intestine that usually ruptures during final
exams; a vestigial
organ in humans.  Archaea  Proposed, but
not widely accepted, sixth taxonomic kingdom that would include the
archaebacteria. Archaebacteria 
Ancient (over 3.5 billion years old) group of prokaryotes; some
biologists want to place this group into a separate Kingdom, the
Archaea. Most currently place it within the Kingdom Monera.
 archaeocyathids
 An extinct group of animals that were part of Cambrian-aged reef
environments, but which were extinct by the close of the Cambrian
Period.  Archean/Proterozoic
Era  The period of time beginning 4.6 billion years ago
with the formation of the Earth and ending 570 million years ago.
 aridity  The
condition of receiving sparse rainfall; associated with cooler
climates because cool air can hold less water vapor than warm air.
Many deserts occur in relatively warm climates, however, because of
local or global influences that block rainfall. arrector
pili  A muscle running from a hair follicle to the
dermis. Contraction of the muscle causes the hair to rise
perpendicular to the skin surface, forming "goose
pimples." arteries  Thick-walled
vessels that carry blood away from the heart.
Singular=artery. arterioles  The
smallest arteries; usually branch into a capillary
bed. artificial
selection  The process in which breeders choose the
variants to be used to produce succeeding generations. ascomycetes 
Division of fungi
that contains the yeasts and morels; ascomycetes produce an ascus (or
sac) in which ascospores are produced. ascus  Structure produced
by sac fungi in which sexual ascospores develop. asexual
reproduction  A method of reproduction in which
genetically identical offspring are produced from a single parent;
occurs by many mechanisms, including fission, budding, and
fragmentation.  assortment  A
way in which meiosis
produces new combinations of genetic information. Paternal and
maternal chromosomes line up randomly during synapsis,
so each daughter cell is likely to receive an assortment of maternal
and paternal chromosomes rather than a complete set from
either. aster Short fibers
produced by cells during mitosis
and meiosis.
These radiate from the centriole
(if it is present).  asteroid impacts
 Hypothesis that links certain mass
extinction events with the impact of a
comet or asteroid, most notably the mass extinction 65 million years
that caused the disappearance of dinosaurs and many other reptilian
groups. Asteroid impacts early in earth history also contributed to
the formation of the atmosphere and oceans. asthma  A
respiratory disorder caused by allergies that constrict the
bronchioles
by inducing spasms in the muscles surrounding the lungs, by causing
the bronchioles to swell, or by clogging the bronchioles with
mucus. asymmetrical  In
animals, a term referring to organisms that lack a general body plan
or axis of symmetry that divides the body into mirror-image
halves. atmosphere  The
envelope of gases that surrounds the Earth; consists largely of
nitrogen (78%) and oxygen (21%). atom  The
smallest indivisible particle of matter
that can have an independent existence. atomic
number  The number of protons
in the nucleus
of an atom. atomic
weight  The sum of the weights of an atom's protons and
neutrons,
the atomic weight differs between isotopes
of the same element. atrioventricular
(AV) node  Tissue in the right ventricle
of the heart that receives the impulse from the atria and transmits
it through the ventricles by way of the bundles of His and the
Purkinje fibers. atrioventricular
(AV) valve  The valve between each auricle and
ventricle
of the heart. auricle  The
chamber of the heart that receives blood from the body returned to
the heart by the veins.
Also referred to as atrium.  autonomic
system  The portion of the peripheral
nervous system that stimulates smooth
muscle, cardiac muscle, and glands; consists of the parasympathetic
and sympathetic
systems. autosomes  The
chromosomes other than the sex
chromosomes. Each member of an autosome
pair (in diploid
organisms) is of similar length and in the genes
it carries.  autotrophic  Refers
to organisms that synthesize their nutrients and obtain their energy
from inorganic raw materials. autotrophs  Organisms
that synthesize their own nutrients; include some bacteria that are
able to synthesize organic molecules from simpler inorganic
compounds. auxins  A
group of hormones
involved in controlling plant growth and other functions; once
thought responsible for phototropism
by causing the cells on the shaded side of a plant to elongate,
thereby causing the plant to bend toward the light. axial
skeleton  The skull, vertebral column, and rib cage;
one of the two components of the skeleton in vertebrates. axillary buds 
Buds borne in the axil (where the leaf meets the stem) of a
stem. axons  Long
fibers that carry signals away from the cell body of a
neuron. 



bacteriophages  Viruses
that attack and kill bacterial cells; composed only of DNA and
protein.  bark  The outer
layer of the stems of woody plants; composed of an outer layer of
dead cells (cork)
and an inner layer of phloem.
 Barr body
Inactivated X-chromosome
in mammalian females. Although inactivated, the Barr body is
replicated prior to cell division and thus is passed on to all
descendant cells of the embryonic cell that had one of its
X-chromosomes inactivated. 
1 
2 barriers to
gene flow Factors, such as geographic, mechanical, and behavioral
isolating mechanisms that restrict gene flow between populations,
leading to populations with differing allele frequencies. basal body  
A structure at the base of a cilium
or flagellum;
consists of nine triplet microtubules
arranged in a circle with no central microtubule.  base  A
substance that lowers the hydrogen ion concentration in a
solution. basidia  Specialized
club-shaped structures on the underside of club fungi
(Basidiomycetes) within which spores form (sing.:
basidium). basidiomycetes 
The club fungi, a major group of fungi
that all produce a structure (basidium) on which basidiospores
are produced. Includes mushrooms and toadstools.  basidiospores  The
spores formed on the basidia of club fungi
(Basidiomycetes). B
cells  Type of lymphocyte
responsible for antibody-mediated
immunity; mature in the bone marrow and
circulate in the circulatory and lymph systems where they transform
into antibody-producing plasma
cells when exposed to antigens. benthic
zone  One of the two basic subdivisions of the marine
biome;
includes the sea floor and bottom-dwelling organisms. beta decay Type of
radioactive
decay in which a radioisotope
emits a small, negatively-charged and fast-moving particle from its
nucleus. The beta particle is similar in size, charge, and speed to
an electron and is formed when a neutron in the radioisotope's
nucleus converts to a proton.  bicarbonate
ions   A weak base present in saliva that helps to
neutralize acids in food. big bang
theory   A model for the evolution of the universe that
holds that all matter
and energy
in the universe were concentrated in one point, which suddenly
exploded. Subsequently, matter condensed to form atoms, elements, and
eventually galaxies and stars. bilateral
symmetry   In animals, refers to those that have a
single axis of symmetry. biliary
system   The bile-producing system consisting of the
liver, gallbladder, and associated ducts. binary
fission  The method by which bacteria reproduce. The
circular DNA molecule is replicated; then the cell splits into two
identical cells, each containing an exact copy of the original cell's
DNA. binding sites 
Areas on the ribosome
within which tRNA-amino
acid complexes fit during protein synthesis. binomial
system of nomenclature  A system of taxonomy
developed by Linnaeus in the early eighteenth century. Each
species
of plant and animal receives a two-term name; the first term is the
genus, and the second is the species. biochemical
cycle   The flow of an element through the living
tissue and physical environment of an ecosystem;
e. g., the carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, and phosphorus
cycles. biochemical
reactions  Specific chemical processes that occur in living
things. biochemistry 
Chemical processes associated with living things. biodiversity 
 Biological diversity; can be measured in terms of genetic,
species, or ecosystem
diversity. biogeography  The
study of the distribution of plants and animals across the
Earth. bioluminescent  Refers
to organisms that emit light under certain conditions. biomass  The
total weight of living tissue in a community. biome  A
large-scale grouping that includes many communities of a similar
nature. biosphere  All
ecosystems
on Earth as well as the Earth's crust, waters, and atmosphere on and
in which organisms exist; also, the sum of all living matter on
Earth. birds  Taxonomic class of
terrestrial vertebrates
that are characterized by endothermy
and feathers; descended from some group of reptiles (or possibly
dinosaurs). birth rate  
The ratio between births and individuals in a specified
population
at a particular time. bladder   A
hollow, distensible organ with muscular walls that stores
urine
and expels it through the urethra. blastocoel  The
fluid-filled cavity at the center of a blastula. blastocyst 
 The developmental stage of the fertilized ovum by the time
it is ready to implant; formed from the morula
and consists of an inner cell mass, an internal cavity, and an outer
layer of cells (the trophoblast). blastula   A
ball of cells surrounding a fluid-filled cavity (the blastocoel) that
is produced by the repeated cleavage of a zygote.
 blending  Term applied
to 19th century belief that parental traits "blended" in their
offspring; disproven by Mendel's work. blood group
or type  One of the classes into which blood can be
separated on the basis of the presence or absence of certain
antigens;
notably, the ABO types and the Rh blood group. B memory
cells  Long-lived B cells that are produced after an
initial exposure to an antigen
and play an important role in secondary
immunity. They remain in the body and
facilitate a more rapid responce if the antigen is encountered
again. body
fossil  The actual remains (however permineralized,
compressed or otherwise post-mortem altered) of an organism; includes
bones, shells, and teeth. bolus A mass of chewed
food mixed with salivary secretions that is propelled into the
espohagus
during the swallowing phase of digestion. bony fish  A term
applied collectively to all groups of fish with bony (as opposed to
cartilaginous) skeletons. bottlenecks  Drastic
short-term reductions in population size caused by natural disasters,
disease, or predators; can lead to random changes in the population's
gene
pool. brachiopods  A
phylum of hinge-shelled animals that have left an excellent
fossil
record; brachiopods live on or in the
ocean floor. 
1 | 
2 brachydactly 
Human genetic disorder that causes production of an extra digit; an
autosomal
dominant trait. Sometimes referred to as
polydactly. brain  The most
anterior, most highly developed portion of the central
nervous system.  brain
stem  The portion of the brain that is continuous with
the spinal
cord and consists of the medulla
oblongata and pons
of the hindbrain and the midbrain.  bronchi  Tubes
that carry air from the trachea
to the lungs (sing.: bronchus). bronchioles  Small
tubes in the lungs that are formed by the branching of the bronchi;
terminate in the alveoli. bronchitis  
A respiratory disorder characterized by excess mucus
production and swelling of the bronchioles; caused by long-term
exposure to irritants such as cigarette smoke and air
pollutants. brown algae 
Multicellular protistans placed in the Division Phaeophyta, includes
kelp. brush
border  The collection of microvilli
forming a border on the intestinal side of the epithelial
cells of the small
intestine. bryophytes  The
nonvascular plants, characterized by life cycles dominated by the
gametophyte
phase. This group includes the mosses, liverworts, and hornworts,
which lack lignified conducting tissues. budding  1.
Asexual
production of new organisms; usually found in yeast; 2. the process
by which HIV
and similar viruses
leave the cell (other than by lysing).  bud
sports  Buds that produce fruit
that is different from the rest of the fruit on the tree;
vegetatively propagated by grafting cuttings onto another
plant. buffers  Chemicals
that maintain pH
values within narrow limits by absorbing or releasing hydrogen
ions. bulbourethral
glands  Glands that secrete a mucus-like substance that
is added to sperm
and provides lubrication during intercourse. bursae  Small
sacs lined with synovial
membrane and filled with synovial fluid; act as cushions to reduce
friction between tendons
and bones.



calcitonin  A
hormone
produced by the thyroid that plays a role in regulating calcium
levels. calcium
carbonate  Chemical that also occurs in limestone and
marble. Calvin cycle 
(aka Calvin-Benson Cycle or Carbon Fixation) Series of biochemical,
enzyme-mediated
reactions during which atmospheric carbon dioxide is reduced
and incorporated into organic molecules, eventually some of this
forms sugars. In eukaryotes,
this occurs in the stroma
of the chloroplast. cambium A lateral
meristem
in plants. Types of cambiums include vascular,
cork,
and intercalary.  Cambrian  Geologic
period that begins the Paleozoic
Era 570 million years ago. Marked in its
beginning by a proliferation of animals with hard, preservable parts,
such as brachiopods,
trilobites,
and archaeocyathids.
 campodactyly  A
dominant trait in which a muscle is improperly attached to bones in
the little finger, causing the finger to be permanently
bent. capillaries  Small,
thin-walled blood vessels that allow oxygen to diffuse from the blood
into the cells and carbon dioxide to diffuse from the cells into the
blood.  capillary
bed  A branching network of capillaries supplied by
arterioles
and drained by venules. capsid The protein
"shell" of a free virus particle. This definition is from the
Glossary at the UCMP site at http://www.ucmp.berkeley.edu/glossary/gloss4cell.html
 capsule  1. Structure
produced around certain bacteria; 2. Structure produced by the
bryophyte
sporophyte
that contains spores
produced by meiosis. carbohydrates  Organic
molecules composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen that serve as
energy sources and structural materials for cells of all
organisms. cardiac
cycle  One heartbeat; consists of atrial contraction
and relaxation, ventricular contraction and relaxation, and a short
pause. cardiac
muscle  The type of muscle that is found in the walls
of the heart. Cardiac muscle is striated but branched, unlike the
straight-shaped striated skeletal
muscle cells.  cardiovascular
system  The human circulatory system consisting of the
heart and the vessels that transport blood to and from the heart.

 carnivores Term
applied to a heterotroph,
usually an animal, that eats other animals. Carnivores function as
secondary, tertiary, or top consumers in food
chains and food
webs.  carotenoids  Major
group of accessory pigments in plants; includes beta carotene.

 carpals  The
bones that make up the wrist joint.  carpels  The
female reproductive structures of a flower;
consisting of the ovary,
style,
and stigma.
 carrageenan 
Chemical extracted from red
algae that is added to commercial ice
creams as an emulsifying agent. carrying
capacity  The maximum population size that can be
regularly sustained by an environment; the point where the population
size levels off in the logistic growth model. Casparian
strip  In plants, an impermeable waxy layer between the
cells of the endodermis
that stops water and solutes from entering the xylem,
except by passing through the cytoplasm of adjacent cells.

1 
2 cast Type of fossil
preservation where the original material of the fossil has decayed
and been replaced later by another material, much the way a plaster
cast is made in a mold.  catabolic
reactions  Reactions in cells in which existing
chemical bonds are broken and molecules are broken down; generally
produce energy,
involve oxidation,
and lead to a decrease in atomic order. catastrophism
Once-popular belief that events in earth history had occurred in the
past a sudden events and by processes unlike those operating today.
Periods of catastrophic change were followed by long periods of
little change. A subgroup, the Diluvialists, contended that Noah's
Flood was the last of many floods which had occurred throughout earth
history. cell
body  In a neuron,
the part that contains the nucleus
and most of the cytoplasm and the organelles.

1 
 2 cell
cycle  The sequence of events from one division of a
cell to the next; consists of mitosis
(or division) and interphase.
 cell-mediated
immunity  Immune reaction directed against body cells
that have been infected by viruses
and bacteria; controlled by T
cells. cell
plate  In plants, a membrane-bound space produced
during cytokinesis by the vesicles of the Golgi
apparatus. The cell plate fuses with the
plasma membrane, dividing the cell into two compartments. cells  The
smallest structural units of living matter
capable of functioning independently. 
1 
2 cell
theory  One of the four (or five) unifying concepts in
biology. The cell theory states that all living things are composed
of at least one cell and that the cell is the fundamental unit of
function in all organisms. Corollaries: the chemical composition of
all cells is fundamentally alike; all cells arise from preexisting
cells through cell division. cellular
respiration  The transfer of energy
from various molecules
to produce ATP;
occurs in the mitochondria
of eukaryotes,
the cytoplasm of prokaryotes.
In the process, oxygen is consumed and carbon dioxide is
generated. cellulose  A
polysaccharide
that is composed of unbranched chains of glucose;
the major structural carbohydrate
of plants, insoluble in water, and indigestible in the human
intestine. 
1 
2 cell wall 
Structure produced by some cells outside their cell membrane;
variously composed of chitin,
peptidoglycan, or cellulose.  Cenozoic
Era  The period of geologic time beginning after the
end of the Mesozoic
Era 65 million years ago and encompassing
the present. Commonly referred to as the age of mammals.
 central
nervous system (CNS)  The division of the
nervous
system that includes the brain
and spinal
cord.  centriole Paired
cellular organelle
which functions in the organization of the mitotic spindle
during cell division in eukaryotes.
 centromere  A
specialized region on each chromatid
to which kinetochores
and sister chromatids attach.  cephalization  The
concentration of sensory tissues in the anterior part of the body
(head).  cerebellum  That
part of the brain
concerned with fine motor coordination and body movement, posture,
and balance; is part of the hindbrain and is attached to the rear
portion of the brain
stem.  cerebral
cortex  The outer layer of gray matter in the cerebrum;
consists mainly of neuronal cell
bodies and dendrites
in humans; associated with higher functions, including language and
abstract thought.  cerebrum  The
part of the forebrain
that includes the cerebral cortex; the largest part of the human
brain.  cervix  The
lower neck of the uterus
that opens into the vagina.
 channels  Transport
proteins that act as gates to control the movement of sodium and
potassium ions across the plasma membrane of a nerve cell. chemical
equilibrium  The condition when the forward and reverse
reaction rates are equal and the concentrations of the products
remain constant. chemiosmosis  The
process by which ATP
is produced in the inner membrane of a mitochondrion.
The electron
transport system transfers
protons
from the inner compartment to the outer; as the protons flow back to
the inner compartment, the energy of their movement is used to add
phosphate to ADP,
forming ATP. 
1 
2 chemotrophs  Organisms
(usually bacteria) that derive energy
from inorganic reactions; also known as chemosynthetic. chiasma  The
site where the exchange of chromosome
segments between homologous
chromosomes takes place (crossing-over)
(pl.: chiasmata).  chitin  A
polysaccharide
contained in fungi;
also forms part of the hard outer covering of insects. chlamydia  A
sexually transmitted disease caused by a parasitic
bacterium that lives inside cells of the reproductive
tract. chlorofluorocarbons
(CFCs)  Chemical substances used in refrigerators, air
conditioners, and solvents that drift to the upper stratosphere and
dissociate. Chlorine released by CFCs reacts with ozone,
eroding the ozone layer. chlorophyll  The
pigment in green plants that absorbs solar energy.  chlorophyll a 
The green photosynthetic pigment common to all photosynthetic
organisms.  chlorophyll b 
An accessory chlorophyll found in green algae and plants. chlorophyll c 
An accessory chlorophyll found in some protistans. Chlorophyta The
taxonomic division that contains what are commonly called the green
algae. 
 chloroplasts  Disk-like
organelles
with a double membrane found in eukaryotic
plant cells; contain thylakoids
and are the site of photosynthesis.
ATP
is generated during photosynthesis by chemiosmosis.
 cholecystokinin  A
hormone
secreted in the duodenum
that causes the gallbladder to release bile and the pancreas
to secrete lipase. chorion  The
two-layered structure formed from the trophoblast
after implantation; secretes human
chorionic gonadotropin. chorionic
villi sampling (CVS)  A method of prenatal testing in
which fetal cells from the fetal side of the placenta
(chorionic villi) are extracted and analyzed for chromosomal
and biochemical
defects. chromatid  Generally
refers to a strand of a replicated chromosome;
consists of DNA
and protein.
 chromatin  A
complex of DNA
and protein
in eukaryotic
cells that is dispersed throughout the nucleus
during interphase
and condensed into chromosomes
during meiosis
and mitosis.
 chromosomes  Structures
in the nucleus
of a eukaryotic
cell that consist of DNA
molecules that contain the genes.
 chromosome
theory of inheritance  Holds that chromosomes are the
cellular components that physically contain genes;
proposed in 1903 by Walter Sutton and Theodore Boveri. Chrysophytes 
Protistan
division that is referred to as the golden brown algae; includes the
diatoms. 
1 
2 cilia  Hair-like
organelles extending from the membrane of many eukaryotic
cells; often function in locomotion (sing.: cilium). circadian
rhythms  Biorhythms that occur on a daily
cycle. circulatory
system  One of eleven major body organ systems in
animals; transports oxygen, carbon dioxide, nutrients, and waste
products between cells and the respiratory
system and carries chemical signals from
the endocrine
system; consists of the blood, heart, and
blood vessels.  circulatory
system, closed  A system that uses a continuous series
of vessels of different sizes to deliver blood to body cells and
return it to the heart; found in echinoderms and vertebrates.
 circulatory
system, open  A system in which the circulating fluid
is not enclosed in vessels at all times; found in insects, crayfish,
some mollusks, and other invertebrates.  classes  Taxonomic
subcategories of phyla.
 clavicle  The
collar bone. cleavage
furrow  A constriction of the cell membrane at the
equator of the cell that marks the beginning of cytokinesis
in animal cells. The cell divides as the furrow deepens. climax
community  The stage in community
succession where the community has become relatively stable through
successful adjustment to its environment. clitoris  A
short shaft with a sensitive tip located where the labia
minora meet; consists of erectile tissue
and is important in female sexual arousal.  clone  An exact
copy of a DNA
segment; produced by recombinant DNA technology. closed
community  A community
in which populations
have similar range boundaries and density peaks; forms a discrete
unit with sharp boundaries. codominance  A
type of inheritance in which heterozygotes
fully express both alleles.
 codon  A
sequence of three nucleotides
in messenger
RNA that codes for a single
amino
acid.  coelom  In
animals, a body cavity between the body wall and the digestive
system that forms during preadult
development. coelomates  Animals
that have a coelom or body cavity lined with mesoderm. coenzymes  Chemicals
required by a number of enzymes
for proper functioning; also known as enzyme cofactors. cohesion  The
force that holds molecules of the same substance together. cohesion-adhesion
theory  Describes the properties of water that help
move it through a plant. Cohesion is the ability of water molecules
to stick together (held by hydrogen
bonds), forming a column of water
extending from the roots
to the leaves; adhesion
is the ability of water molecules to stick to the cellulose
in plant cell walls, counteracting the force of gravity and helping
to lift the column of water. 
1 
2 
3 collenchyma  One
of the three major cell types in plants; are elongated and have
thicker walls than parenchyma
cells and are usually arranged in strands; provide support and are
generally in a region that is growing. 
1 
2 colonial  1. Level of
organization intermediate between unicellular
and multicellular
- organisms are composed of multiple cells but fail to exhibit
specialization of those cells. Examples: Volvox, a colonial
alga. Click HERE
to view a series of images of Volvox. 2. Term applied to
organisms that occur in a fixed location, with one generation growing
atop previous generations, as in coral reefs.  commensalism  A
symbiotic
relationship in which one species
benefits and the other is not affected. community  All
species
or populations
living in the same area. community
age  One of the factors that helps cause the
latitudinal diversity gradient. Tropical communities have had more
time to evolve because they have been less disrupted by advancing ice
sheets and other relatively recent climatic changes. community
simplification  The reduction of overall species
diversity in a community; generally caused by human
activity. community
succession  The sequential replacement of species in a
community by immigration of new species and by local extinction
of old ones. compact
bone  The outer dense layer that forms the shaft of the
long bones; made up of concentric layers of mineral deposits
surrounding a central opening. 
 companion
cells  Specialized cells in the phloem
that load sugars into the sieve
elements and help maintain a functional
plasma membrane in the sieve elements. 
1 
2 competition  One
of the biological interactions that can limit population growth;
occurs when two species vie with each other for the same
resource. competitive
exclusion  Competition between species that is so
intense that one species completely eliminates the second species
from the area. competitive
release  Occurs when one of two competing species is
removed from an area, thereby releasing the remaining species from
one of the factors that limited its population size. complementary
nucleotides  The bonding preferences of nucleotides,
Adenine
with Thymine,
and Cytosine
with Guanine.
Also referred to as complementary base pairing.  complement
system  A chemical defense system that kills
microorganisms directly, supplements the inflammatory
response, and works with, or complements,
the immune
system.  complete
dominance  The type of inheritance in which both
heterozygotes
and dominant homozygotes
have the same phenotype. complete
flower Condition in which all flower parts are present. Example:
lily.  compound  A
substance formed by two or more elements
combined in a fixed ratio. compound leaf 
A leaf in which the blade forms small leaflets. Compound leaves that
have several small leaflets originating from a central axis are
termed pinnately compound; example: rose. Compound leaves that have
their leaflets originating from a common point are termed palmately
compound; example: palm.  compression Type of
fossilization in which the fossil is flattened (compressed)m by the
weight of overlying sediment.  conditioned
response  The response to a stimulus that occurs when
an animal has learned to associate the stimulus
with a certain positive or negative effect. cones  Light
receptors in primates' eyes that operate in bright light; provide
color vision and visual acuity. conifers  Group of
gymnosperms
that reproduce by cones and have needle-like leaves (in general);
includes the pines.  connective
tissue Animal tissue composed of cells embedded in a matrix (gel,
elastic fibers, liquid, or inorganic minerals). Includes loose,
dense, and fibrous connective tissues that provide strength (bone,
cartilage), storage (bone, adipose), and flexibility (tendons,
ligaments).  consumers  The
higher levels in a food
pyramid; consist of primary consumers,
which feed on the producers,
and secondary consumers, which feed on the primary
consumers. continuous
variation  Occurs when the phenotypes
of traits controlled by a single gene
cannot be sorted into two distinct phenotypic classes, but rather
fall into a series of overlapping classes.  contractile
vacuole Organelle in many eukaryotes that acts as a bilge pump in
the active transport of excess water from the cell.  contrast  In
relation to microscopes, the ability to distinguish different
densities of structures.  convergent
evolution  The development of similar structures in
distantly related organisms as a result of adapting
to similar environments and/or strategies of life. Example: wings of
birds and insects, the body shape of dolphins, sharks, and the
extinct marine reptiles known as ichthyosaurs. convergent
plate boundary  The boundary between two plates that
are moving toward one another. coprolites  Fossilized
feces.  cork  The outer
layer of the bark in woody plants; composed of dead cells.
 cork
cambium   A layer of lateral meristematic
tissue between the cork and the
phloem
in the bark of woody plants.  coronary
arteries  Arteries
that supply the heart's muscle fibers with nutrients and oxygen.
 corpus
callosum   Tightly bundled nerve fibers that connect
the right and left hemispheres of the cerebrum. corpus
luteum   A structure formed from the ovulated
follicle
in the ovary;
secretes progesterone
and estrogen.
 cortex  1) The
outer part of an organ, e.g., the adrenal cortex, which produces
several steroid
hormones;
2) in plants, the region of the stem or root between the
epidermis
and the vascular
bundle(s). 
 cortisol  The
primary glucocorticoid
hormone;
released by the adrenal cortex. cotyledon  A
leaf-like structure that is present in the seeds of flowering
plants; appears during seed germination
and sometimes is referred to as a seed leaf.  countercurrent
flow  An arrangement by which fish obtain oxygen from
the water that flows through their gills. Water flows across the
respiratory
surface of the gill in one direction while
blood flows in the other direction through the blood vessels on the
other side of the surface.  courtship
behavior   Behavioral sequences that precede
mating. covalent
bond  A chemical bond created by the sharing of
electrons
between atoms. cranium  The
braincase; composed of several bones fitted together at immovable
joints.  Cretaceous
Period The geologic period between the Jurassic Period (140
milliojn years ago) and the Tertiary Period (beginning 65 million
years ago). The Cretaceous was marked by a mass extinction that
closed the period along with the reign of the nonavian dinosaurs.
 cristae  Structures
formed by the folding of the inner membrane of a mitochondrion
(sing.: crista).  crossing-over  During
the first meiotic
prophase,
the process in which part of a chromatid
is physically exchanged with another chromatid to form
chromosomes
with new allele
combinations. 
 crossopterygians  A
type of lobe-finned fish with lungs that were ancestral to
amphibians.
 crustaceans  A
large taxonomic
class of arthropods that includes lobsters, shrimps, and
crabs. cuticle   A
film composed of wax and cutin that occurs on the external surface of
plant stems and leaves and helps to prevent water loss.  cyanobacteria  
Blue-green bacteria; unicellular
or filamentous chains of cells that carry out photosynthesis. cycadeoids A group
of gymnosperm
seed plants not closely rated to, but superficially similar to, the
cycads. Cycads and cycadeoids were dominant floristic elements of
early and middle Mesozoic
landscapes. This groupo is also known as the Bennettitaleans.
 cycads  Group of
gymnosperm
seed plants that have large fern-like leaves and reproduce by cones
but not flowers.  cycle  A
recurring sequence of events; e. g., the secretion of certain
hormones
at regular intervals. cyclin   A
protein
found in the dividing cells of many organisms that acts as a control
during cell division.  cystic
fibrosis  An autosomal
recessive
genetic disorder that causes the production of mucus
that clogs the airways of the lungs and the ducts of the
pancreas
and other secretory glands. cytokinesis  
The division of the cytoplasm
during cell division. cytokinins  
A group of hormones
that promote cell division and inhibit aging of green tissues in
plants.  cytology  The
branch of biology dealing with cell structure. cytoplasm  The
viscous semiliquid inside the plasma membrane of a cell; contains
various macromolecules
and organelles
in solution and suspension.  cytosine  One of the
pyrimidine
nitrogenous bases occurring in both DNA
and RNA.
 cytoskeleton  A
three-dimensional network of microtubules
and filaments
that provides internal support for the cells, anchors internal cell
structures, and functions in cell movement and division.
 cytoxic T
cells  T
cells that destroy body cells infected by
viruses
or bacteria; also attack bacteria, fungi,
parasites,
and cancer cells and will kill cells of transplanted organs if they
are recognized as foreign; also known as killer T cells.  



reactions  The photosynthetic
process in which food (sugar) molecules are formed from carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere with the use of ATP;
can occur in the dark as long as ATP is present.  death
rate  The ratio between deaths and individuals in a
specified population at a particular time. decay series
Most radioisotopes
do not decay into a stable daughter element in one single decay, but
rather through a series of radioactive intermediaries.  deciduous Term
applied to trees that lose the leaves and have a dormancy period at
least once per year.  deletion  The
loss of a chromosome
segment without altering the number of chromosomes. dendrites  Short,
highly branched fibers that carry signals toward the cell
body of a neuron.
 dendrochronology  The
process of determining the age of a tree or wood used in structures
by counting the number of annual growth
rings. deoxyribonucleic
acid (DNA)  A nucleic
acid composed of two polynucleotide
strands wound around a central axis to form a double helix; the
repository of genetic information. Nucleic acid that functions as the
physical carrier of inheritance for 99% of all species. The molecule
is double-stranded and composed of two strands in an antiparallel and
complementary
arrangement. The basic unit, the nucleotide,
consists of a molecule of deoxyribose
sugar, a phosphate group, and one of four nitrogenous bases.

1 
2 deoxyribose 
Five-carbon sugar found in nucleotides
of DNA. 
 depth
diversity gradient  The increase in species richness
with increasing water depth until about 2000 meters below the
surface, where species richness begins to decline. dermal system 
Plant organ system that provides the covering for the
plant. dermis  One of
the two layers of skin; a connective
tissue layer under the epidermis
containing elastic and collagen fibers, capillary
networks, and nerve endings. desert
biome  Characterized by dry conditions and plants and
animals that have adapted
to those conditions; found in areas where local or global influences
block rainfall. desmosome  A
circular region of membrane cemented to an adjacent membrane by a
molecular glue made of polysaccharides; found in tissues that undergo
stretching. deuterostomes  Animals
in which the first opening that appears in the embryo
becomes the anus
while the mouth appears at the other end of the digestive
system. Main groups include chordates and
echinoderms.  Devonian Period of
geologic time from 410 - 360 million years before the present. Life
on land diversified, with the amphibians appearing late in this
period. Plants underwent major changes, including the development of
forests and seeds. In the water, fish diversified into all modern
groups as well as numerous now-extinct forms.  diabetes mellitus, Types I
and II  A disorder associated with defects in
insulin
action. Type I diabetes is characterized by inadequate insulin
secretion; Type II diabetes is characterized by impaired insulin
secretion in response to elevated blood glucose
levels or by loss of sensitivity to insulin by target
cells.  diaphragm  A
dome-shaped muscle that separates the thoracic
and abdominal cavities.  diastole  The
filling of the ventricle
of the heart with blood.  diatomaceous
earth  Fossilized deposits of diatoms; used for
abrasives, polishes and as a filtering agent. dicots  One of
the two main types of flowering
plants; characterized by having two
cotyledons,
floral organs arranged in cycles of four or five, and leaves with
reticulate veins; include trees (except conifers) and most ornamental
and crop plants.  dictyosomes  Organelles
in plant cells composed of a series of flattened membrane sacs that
sort, chemically modify, and package proteins
produced on the rough
endoplasmic reticulum. Also known as the
Golgi
Apparatus.  diencephalon  Part
of the forebrain;
consists of the thalamus
and hypothalamus. diffusion  The
spontaneous movement of particles from an area of higher
concentration to an area of lower concentration.  digestion  The
process of breaking down food into its molecular and chemical
components so that these nutrient molecules can cross plasma
membranes.  digestive
system  One of eleven major body organ systems in
animals; converts food from the external environment into nutrient
molecules that can be used and stored by the body and eliminates
solid wastes; involves five functions: movement, secretion,
digestion, absorption, and elimination.  dihybrid
cross  In genetics, a cross that involves two sets of
characteristics.  dinoflagellates
 Single-celled to colonial protistans
characterized by two flagella,
one girdling the cell and the other trailing the cell. Some
dinoflagellates exist in coral, in a symbiotic relationship. These
dinoflagellates are termed the zooxanthellae. Other dinoflagellates
occur in such high numbers that the water is colored red, a
phenomenon known as a red
tide. 
 dinosaurs  Any of the
Mesozoic
diapsids (once considered to be reptiles) belonging to the groups
designated as ornithischians and saurischians.  dioecious Term
applied to plants having separate male and female plants. diploid  Cells
that contain homologous
chromosomes. The number of chromosomes in
the cells is the diploid number and is equal to 2n (n is
the number of homologous pairs).  directional
selection  A process of natural
selection that tends to favor
phenotypes
at one extreme of the phenotypic range.  disaccharides  1.
Sugars made up of two monosaccharides
held together by a covalent
bond; e.g., sucrose and lactose. 2.
Type of sugar (saccharide) composed of two sugar molecules bonded
together with an ester (covalent)
bond examples include sucrose, maltose, and lactose.  discontinuous
variation  Occurs when the phenotypes
of traits controlled by a single gene can be sorted into two distinct
phenotypic classes. disruptive
selection  A process of natural
selection that favors individuals at both
extremes of a phenotypic range.  distal
tubule  The section of the renal
tubule where tubular
secretion occurs.  divergent
evolution  The divergence of a single interbreeding
population or species into two or more descendant species.
 divergent
plate boundary  The boundary between two tectonic
plates that are moving apart.  diversity  The
different types of organisms
that occur in a community. DNA
hybridization  The formation of hybrid DNA molecules
that contain a strand of DNA from two different species. The number
of complementary sequences in common in the two strands is an
indication of the degree of relatedness of the species. DNA
ligase  In recombinant DNA technology, an
enzyme
that seals together two DNA fragments from different sources to form
a recombinant DNA molecule. DNA
polymerase  In DNA replication, the enzyme
that links the complementary nucleotides together to form the newly
synthesized strand. dominance  The
property of one of a pair of alleles
that suppresses the expression of the other member of the pair in
heterozygotes. dominance
hierarchy  A social structure among a group of animals
in which one is dominant and the others have subordinate nonbreeding
positions. dominant  Refers
to an allele
of a gene that is always expressed in heterozygotes. double
fertilization  A characteristic of angiosperms
in which a pollen
tube carries two sperm cells to the female
gametophyte
in the ovule.
One sperm cell fuses with the egg cell and gives rise to a
diploid
embryo
The other sperm cell fuses with the two polar cells to form a
triploid cell that develops into the endosperm.

1 
2 duodenum  The
upper part of the small
intestine.  duplication  An
extra copy of a chromosome
segment without altering the number of chromosomes. dystrophin  Protein
making up only 0.002% of all protein in skeletal muscle but which
appears vital for proper functioning of the muscle. Sufferers of
muscular dystrophy appear to lack dystrophin.  



glands  Sweat glands that are linked to the
sympathetic
nervous system and are widely distributed
over the body surface. ecological
niche  The role an organism occupies and the function
it performs in an ecosystem; closely associated with
feeding. ecological
time  A timescale that focuses on community events that
occur on the order of tens to hundreds of years. ecology  The
study of how organisms
interact with each other and their physical environment. ecosystem  The
community living in an area and its physical environment. ecotones  Well-deÞned
boundaries typical of closed
communities. ecotype  A
subdivision of a species;
a stage in the formation of a species such that reproductive
isolation has occurred. ectoderm  The
outer layer of cells in embryonic development; gives rise to the
skin, brain, and nervous
system. Also, the outermost tissue layer
in þatworms. ectotherms  Animals
with a variable body temperature that is determined by the
environment. Examples: fish, frogs, and reptiles. effector  In
a closed system, the element that initiates an action in response to
a signal from a sensor.
In human systems, a muscle or gland often serves as an effector.
 ejaculatory
duct  In males, a short duct that connects the
vas
deferens from each testis
to the urethra.
 electron  A
subatomic particle with a negative charge. Electrons circle the
atom's nucleus
in regions of space known as orbitals.  electron
acceptor  A molecule that forms part of the electron
transport system that transfers electrons ejected by chlorophyll
during photosynthesis.
Part of the energy carried by the electrons is transferred to
ATP,
part is transferred to NADPH, and part is lost in the transfer
system. electron
transport  1) A series of coupled oxidation/reduction
reactions where electrons are passed like hot potatoes from one
membrane-bound protein/enzyme to another before being finally
attached to a terminal electron acceptor (usually oxygen or NADPH).
ATP
is formed by this process. 2) coupled series of oxidation/reduction
reactions during which ATP is generated by energy transfer as
electrons move from high reducing state to lower reducing state.

1 | 
2 electrostatic
attraction  The attraction between atoms of opposite
charge that holds the atoms together in ionic
bonds.  element  A
substance composed of atoms with the same atomic
number; cannot be broken down in ordinary
chemical reactions. elongation  During
protein synthesis, the growth of the polypeptide chain through the
addition of amino
acids; the second step in translation.

1 | 
2 embryo  Term applied to
the zygote
after the beginning of mitosis
that produces a multicellular structure.  embryo sac
Alternate term applied to the angiosperm
female gametophyte
contained within a megaspore.
 emphysema  Lung
disease characterized by shortness of breath, often associated with
smoking. endergonic  Chemical
reactions that require energy input to begin. endochondral
ossification  The process by which human bones form
from cartilage. endocrine
system  One of eleven major body organ systems in
animals; a system of glands that works with the nervous system in
controlling the activity of internal organs, especially the kidneys,
and in coordinating the long-range response to external stimuli.
 endocytosis  The
incorporation of materials from outside the cell by the formation of
vesicles in the plasma membrane. The vesicles surround the material
so the cell can engulf it. endoderm  The
inner layer of cells in embryonic development that gives rise to
organs and tissues associated with digestion and respiration. Also,
the inner tissue layer in þatworms. endodermis  A
layer of cells surrounding the vascular cylinder of plants.
 endometrium  The
inner lining of the uterus.
 endoplasmic
reticulum (ER)  A network of membranous tubules in the
cytoplasm of a cell; involved in the production of phospholipids,
proteins,
and other functions. Rough ER is studded with ribosomes;
smooth ER is not.  endoskeleton  An
internal supporting skeleton with muscles on the outside; in
vertebrates, consists of the skull, spinal column, ribs, and
appendages.  endosperm  A
food storage tissue that provides nutrients to the developing
embryo
in angiosperms;
formed from the triploid cell produced when a sperm cell fertilizes
the central cell. Some endosperm is solid (as in corn), some is
liquid (as in coconut).  endosymbiosis
Theory that attempts to explain the origin of the DNA-containing
mitochondria
and chloroplasts
in early eukaryotes
by the engulfing of various types of bacteria that were not digested
but became permanent additions to the ancestral "eukaryote".
 endothermic  A
reaction that gives off energy. The product is in a lower energy
state than the reactants.  endotherms  Animals
that have the ability to maintain a constant body temperature over a
wide range of environmental conditions. endothermy  The
internal control of body temperature; the ability to generate and
maintain internal body heat. energy  The
ability to bring about changes or to do work. energy
flow  The movement of energy through a community via
feeding relationships. energy of
activation  The minimum amount of energy
required for a given reaction to occur; varies from reaction to
reaction.  entropy  The
degree of disorder in a system. As energy is transferred from one
form to another, some is lost as heat; as the energy decreases, the
disorder in the system&emdash;and thus the
entropy&emdash;increases. enzymes  Protein
molecules that act as catalysts in biochemical reactions.
 eon The longest umit of
geological time.  epidermis  1.
The outermost layer of skin consisting of several layers of
epithelial
cells&emdash;notably, keratinocytes&emdash;and,
in the inner layer of the epidermis, basal cells and melanocytes.
2. The outer layer of cells in the plant body, often covered by a
waxy cuticle. epididymis  A
long, convoluted duct on the testis
where sperm are stored. 
 epiglottis  A
þap of tissue that closes off the trachea
during swallowing.  epinephrine  A
hormone
produced by the adrenal medulla and secreted under stress;
contributes to the "Þght or þight" response. epistasis The masking
of the effects of one gene by the action of another, example: widow's
peak masked by the baldness gene. epithelial
tissue Cells in animals that are closely packed in either single
or multiple layers, and which cover both internal and external
surfaces of the animal body. Also referred to as epithelium.

 epoch Subdivision of a
geological period.  eras One of the major
divisions of the geologic time scale.  erythrocytes  Red
blood cells; doubly concave, enucleated cells that transport oxygen
in the blood.  esophagus  The
muscular tube extending between and connecting the pharynx
to the stomach. estrogen  A
female sex hormone
that performs many important functions in reproduction. ethylene  A
gaseous plant hormone
that stimulates fruit ripening and the dropping of leaves. Eubacteria  The
subunit of the Monera
that includes the true bacteria such as E. coli. One of the
three major groups of prokaryotes in the Kingdom
Monera. The eubacteria have cell walls
containing peptidoglycan.  Euglenoids  Term
applied to a division of protozoans
that have one long flagellum,
no cell wall, and which may have chloroplasts. eukaryote  A
type of cell found in many organisms including single-celled protists
and multicellular fungi, plants, and animals; characterized by a
membrane-bounded nucleus
and other membraneous organelles; an organism composed of such cells.
The first eukaryotes are encountered in rocks approximately 1.2-1.5
billion years old.  euphotic
zone  The upper part of the marine biome
where light penetrates and photosynthesis
occurs; usually extends to about 200 meters below the water
surface. eutrophication  "Runaway"
growth of aquatic plants that occurs when agricultural fertilizers
containing phosphorus and nitrogen run off into lakes and ponds; also
ultimately increases the plant death rate with the result that the
bacterial decomposition of the dead plants uses up oxygen, causing
Þsh and other organisms to suffocate. evaporation  The
part of the hydrologic cycle in which liquid water is converted to
vapor and enters the atmosphere. evolution 1) The
change in life over time by adaptation,
variation, over-reproduction, and differential survival/reproduction,
a process referred to by Charles Darwin and Alfred Wallace as
natural
selection. 2) Descent with modification.
 evolutionary
tree  A diagram showing the evolutionary history of
organisms based on differences in amino acid sequences. Organisms
with fewer differences are placed closer together while those with
more differences are further apart.  excretion  The
process of removing the waste products of cellular metabolism from
the body. excretory
system  One of eleven major body systems in animals;
regulates the volume and molecular and ionic constitution of internal
body þuids and eliminates metabolic waste products from the
internal environment. exine Outer covering of
pollen
grains, often containing sporopollenin, an
acid-resistant polysaccharide that allows pollen grains to become
fossils.
 exocytosis  The
process in which a membrane-enclosed vesicle
Þrst fuses with the plasma membrane and then opens and releases
its contents to the outside. exon The DNA
bases that code for an amino
acid sequence. Exons are separated by
introns
that code for no amino acid sequences. 
 exoskeleton  A
hard, jointed, external covering that encloses the muscles and organs
of an organism; typical of many arthropods including
insects. exothermic  A
reaction where the product is at a higher energy level than the
reactants. exponential
rate  An extremely rapid increase, e.g., in the rate of
population growth. expression  In
relation to genes, the phenotypic
manifestation of a trait. Expression may be age-dependent (e.g.,
Huntington disease) or affected by environmental factors (e.g., dark
fur on Siamese cats). extinction  The
elimination of all individuals in a group, both by natural
(dinosaurs, trilobites) and human-induced (dodo, passenger pigeon,
liberals [:)]) means. extracellular
digestion  A form of digestion
found in annelids, crustaceans, and chordates including
vertebrates;
takes place within the lumen of the digestive
system, and the resulting nutrient
molecules are transferred into the blood or body
þuid. extracellular
route  Path taken by water through the root in which water moves
through the spaces between cell walls of the cortex parenchyma.
 eyespot  1.
A pigmented photoreceptor in euglenoids.
The eyespot senses light and orients the cell for maximum rates of
photosynthesis.

2. Term applied to a photosenstive area in starfish.  



In taxonomy,
term applied to subcategories within orders. 2. Term applied to a
group of similar things, such as languages, chromosomes, etc.
 fats  1.
Triglycerides that are solid at room temperature. 2. A legendary pool
player from Minnesota? fauna Term referring
collectively to all animals in an area. The zoological counterpart of
flora.
 feces  Semisolid
material containing undigested foods, bacteria, bilirubin, and water
that is produced in the large intestine and eliminated from the body.
Frequently noted as "hitting the fan". femur  The
upper leg bone. fermentation  The
synthesis of ATP
in the absence of oxygen through glycolysis.

1 | 
2 fertilization  The
fusion of two gametes
(sperm and ovum) to produce a zygote
that develops into a new individual with a genetic heritage derived
from both parents. Strictly speaking, fertilization can be divided
into the fusion of the cells (plasmogamy) and the fusion of
nuclei
(karyogamy).  fibroblast A term
applied to a cell of connective
tissue that is separated from similar
cells by some degree of matrix material; fibroblasts secrete elastin
and collagen protein fibers.  fibrous
root  A root system found in monocots
in which branches develop from the adventitious roots, forming a
system in which all roots are about the same size and
length. filaments  Slender,
thread-like stalks that make up the stamens
of a þower; topped by the anthers.
 filter
feeders  Organisms such as sponges that feed by
removing food from water that Þlters through their
body. filtration  The
removal of water and solutes from the blood; occurs in the
glomerulus
of the nephron. first
law of thermodynamics (conservation) Energy
is neither created nor destroyed, it changes from one form to
another. fitness  A
measure of an individual's ability to survive and reproduce; the
chance that an individual will leave more offspring in the next
generation than other individuals. flagella  long,
whip-like locomotion organelles found in both prokaryotic and
eukaryotic cells; sing.: flagellum. Eukaryotic flagella have an
internal arrangement of microtubules
in a 9 + 2 array.  flame
cell  A specialized cell at the blind end of a
nephridium
that Þlters body þuids. flora Term collectively
applied to all of the plants in an area. The botanical counterpart of
fauna.
 flowers  The
reproductive structures in angiosperm
sporophytes
where gametophytes
are generated.  fluid
feeders  Animals such as aphids, ticks, and mosquitoes
that pierce the body of a host plant or animal and obtain food from
ingesting its þuids. fluid-mosaic  Widely
accepted model of the plasma membrane in which proteins
(the mosaic) are embedded in lipids
(the þuid). 
 follicles
(ovary)  Structures in the ovary
consisting of a developing egg surrounded by a layer of follicle
cells.  follicles
(thyroid)  Spherical structures that make up the
thyroid gland; contain a gel-like colloid surrounded by a single
layer of cells, which secrete thyroglobulin into the
colloid. follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH)  A hormone
secreted by the anterior pituitary
that promotes gamete
formation in both males and females. fontanels  Membranous
areas in the human cranial bones that do not form bony structures
until the child is 14 to 18 months old; know as "soft
spots." food
chain  The simplest representation of energy þow
in a community.
At the base is energy stored in plants, which are eaten by small
organisms, which in turn are eaten by progressively larger organisms;
the food chain is an oversimpliÞcation in that most animals do
not eat only one type of organism. food
pyramid  A way of depicting energy þow in an
ecosystem;
shows producers (mostly plants or other phototrophs)
on the Þrst level and consumers
on the higher levels. food
web  A complex network of feeding interrelations among
species in a natural ecosystem; more accurate and more complex
depiction of energy þow than a food chain. foraminifera  Single-celled
protists
that secrete a shell or test. Accumulations of the shells of dead
foraminifera and other microscopic sea creatures form chalk deposits.

1 | 
2 forebrain  The
part of the brain that consists of the diencephalon and
cerebrum.
 fossil  1. The remains
or traces of prehistoric life preserved in rocks of the Earth's
crust. 2. Any evidence of past life.  fossil
fuels  Fuels that are formed in the Earth from plant or
animal remains; e.g., coal, petroleum, and natural gas. fossil record
1. The observed remains of once-living organisms taken as a
whole. 2. the album Meet the Beatles. founder
effect  The difference in gene pools between an
original population and a new population founded by one or a few
individuals randomly separated from the original population, as when
an island population is founded by one or a few individuals; often
accentuates genetic
drift. fovea  The area
of the eye in which the cones
are concentrated. freshwater
biome  The aquatic biome
consisting of water containing fewer salts than the waters in the
marine biome; divided into two zones: running waters (rivers,
streams) and standing waters (lakes, ponds). frontal
lobe  The lobe of the cerebral
cortex that is responsible for motor
activity, speech, and thought processes.  fruit A ripened
ovary
wall produced from a flower.   fucoxanthin  Brown
accessory pigment found in and characteristic of the brown
algae. Fungi  Nonmobile,
heterotrophic,
mostly multicellular eukaryotes,
including yeasts and mushrooms.  



hypothetical superorganism composed of the Earth's four spheres: the
biosphere,
hydrosphere,
lithosphere,
and atmosphere. gametes  Haploid
reproductive cells (ovum
and sperm).
 gametophyte  The
haploid
stage of a plant exhibiting alternation
of generations, generates gametes by the
process of mitosis.
 ganglia  Clusters
of neurons
that receive and process signals; found in þatworms and
earthworms. 
 gap
junctions  Junctions between the plasma membranes of
animal cells that allow communication between the cytoplasm of
adjacent cells. gastric
pits  The folds and grooves into which the stomach
lining is arranged. gastrin  A
hormone
produced by the pyloric gland area of the stomach that stimulates the
secretion of gastric acids. gastroesophageal
sphincter  A ring of muscle at the junction of the
esophagus
and the stomach that remains closed except during swallowing to
prevent the stomach contents from entering the esophagus. gene
pool  The sum of all the genetic information carried by
members of a population. Note: there is no diving in
the deep end of the gene pool! genera  Taxonomic
subcategories within families (sing.: genus), composed of one or more
species.  genes  SpeciÞc
segments of DNA
that control cell structure and function; the functional units of
inheritance. Sequence of DNA bases usually code for a polypeptide
sequence of amino
acids.  gene
therapy  The insertion of normal or genetically altered
genes into cells through the use of recombinant
DNA technology; usually done to replace
defective genes as part of the treatment of genetic
disorders. genetic
code  The linear series of nucleotides,
read as triplets, that speciÞes the sequence of
amino
acids in proteins. Each triplet
speciÞes an amino acid, and the same codons are used for the
same amino acids in almost all life-forms, an indication of the
universal nature of the code. 
 genetic
divergence  The separation of a population's gene pool
from the gene pools of other populations due to mutation,
genetic drift, and selection. Continued divergence can lead to
speciation. genetic
drift  Random changes in the frequency of
alleles
from generation to generation; especially in small populations, can
lead to the elimination of a particular allele by chance
alone. genetic
maps  Diagrams showing the order of and distance
between genes; constructed using crossover information. genetics  The
study of the structure and function of genes and the transmission of
genes from parents to offspring. genital
herpes  A sexually transmitted disease caused by the
herpes virus;
results in sores on the mucus membranes of the mouth or
genitals. genome  1. The
set of genes carried by an individual. 2. The set of genes shared by
members of a reproductive unit such as a population or
species. genotype  The
genetic (alleleic) makeup of an organism with regard to an observed
trait. geographic
isolation Separation of populations of a species by geographic
means (distance, mountains, rivers, oceans, etc.) that lead to
reproductive isolation of those populations. geographic
range  The total area occupied by a
population. geological
time  The span of time that has passed since the
formation of the Earth and its physical structures; also, a timescale
that focuses on events on the order of thousands of years or more.
 geotropism  Plants'
response to gravity: roots grow downward, showing positive
geotropism, while shoots grow upward in a negative response.

 germ
cells  Collective term for cells in the reproductive
organs of multicellular organisms that divide by meiosis
to produce gametes. gestation Period of
time between fertilization
and birth of an animal. Commonly called pregnancy.  gibberellins  A
group of hormones that stimulate cell division and elongation in
plants. Gibberellic acid (GA), the first of this class to be
discovered, causes bolting (extreme elongation) of stems. GA is also
applied to certain plants to promote larger fruits. gill
slits  Opening or clefts between the gill arches in
Þsh. Water taken in by the mouth passes through the gill slits
and bathes the gills. Also, rudimentary grooves in the neck region of
embryos of air-breathing vertebrates such as humans; a characteristic
of chordates.  ginkgos Group of seed
plants today restricted to a single genus (Ginkgo biloba);
ginkgos were more diverse during the Mesozoic
Era. glial
cells  Nonconducting cells that serve as support cells
in the nervous
system and help to protect
neurons.
 glomerulus  A
tangle of capillaries
that makes up part of the nephron;
the site of Þltration. glucagon  A
hormone
released by the pancreas
that stimulates the breakdown of glycogen
and the release of glucose,
thereby increasing blood levels of glucose. Glucagon and
insulin
work together to maintain blood sugar levels.  glucocorticoids  A
group of steroid
hormones
produced by the adrenal cortex that are important in regulating the
metabolism of carbohydrates,
fats, and proteins. glucose  A six-carbon
single sugar; the most common energy source.  glycogen
Polysaccharide consisting of numerous monosaccharide
glucoses linked together. The animal equivalent of starch.
 glycolipids  Polysaccharides
formed of sugars linked to lipids,
a part of the cell membrane.  glycolysis  The
universal cellular metabolic process in the cell's cytoplasm where
6-carbon glucose is split into two 3-carbon pyruvate molecules, and
some ATP and NADH are produced. Click here
to view the On-Line Biology Book chapter on glycolysis. glycoproteins  Polysaccharides
formed of sugars linked to proteins. On the outer surface of a
membrane, they act as receptors for molecular signals originating
outside the cell. 
 gnetales Group of seed
plants restricted to three genera today (Gnetum,
Ephedra, and Welwitschia); the possible outgroup for
flowering plants. golden brown
algae Common name applied to the protistan division
Chrysophyta. Golgi
complex  Organelles in animal cells composed of a
series of þattened sacs that sort, chemically modify, and
package proteins produced on the rough endoplasmic
reticulum.  gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH)  A hormone
produced by the hypothalamus
that controls the secretion of luteinizing
hormone. gonadotropins  Hormones
produced by the anterior pituitary
that affect the testis
and ovary;
include follicle-stimulating
hormone and luteinizing
hormone. gonads  The
male and female sex organs.  Gondwana Name applied
to the ancient (Paleozoic-early
Mesozoic)
southern hemisphere supercontinent that rifted apart to form
present-day Antarctica, India, Africa, Australia, and South America.
The southern part of Pangaea. gonorrhea  A
sexually transmitted disease that is caused by a bacterium that
inþames and damages epithelial
cells of the reproductive
system. grana  A series
of stacked thylakoid
disks containing chlorophyll;
found in the inner membrane of chloroplasts.
 grasslands
biome  Occurs in temperate and tropical regions with
reduced rainfall or prolonged dry seasons; characterized by deep,
rich soil, an absence of trees, and large herds of grazing
animals. green algae 
Common name for algae placed in the division Chlorophyta.

 greenhouse
effect  The heating that occurs when gases such as
carbon dioxide trap heat escaping from the Earth and radiate it back
to the surface; so-called because the gases are transparent to
sunlight but not to heat and thus act like the glass in a
greenhouse. ground
system  Plant tissue system, composed mainly of
parenchyma
cells with some collenchyma
and sclerenchyma
cells, that occupies the space between the epidermis
and the vascular
system; is involved in photosynthesis,
water and food storage, and support; one of the four main tissue
systems in plants. growth
hormone (GH)  A peptide hormone
produced by the anterior pituitary
that is essential for growth. growth rings
Features of woody stems produced by plants growing in areas with
seasonal (as opposed to year-long) growth. The growth ring marks the
position of the vascular
cambium at the cessation of the previous
year's growth.  guard cells 
Specialized epidermal
cells that flank stomates
and whose opening and closing regulates gas exchange and water loss.

1 | 
2 guanine  One of the
nitrogenous bases in nucleic
acids, guanine is one of the two
purine
bases. 
 gymnosperms  Flowerless,
seed-bearing land plants; the Þrst seed plants; living groups
include the pines, ginkgos, and cycads. Naked seeds. gynoecium Collective
term for all of the carpels
(or pistils)
in a flower. Some flowers have many pistils that are partially or
wholly fused. 
 



 macroevolution  The
combination of events associated with the origin, diversification,
extinction,
and interactions of organisms
which produced the species
that currently inhabit the Earth. Large scale evolutionary change
such as the evolution of new species (or even higher taxa)
and extinction of species. macromolecules  Large
molecules made up of many small organic molecules that are often
referred to as monomers; e.g., carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and
nucleic acids. Macromolecules are polymers of monomers.  macronucleus  In
ciliates, the large nucleus
that carries up to several hundred copies of the genome
and controls metabolism and asexual
reproduction.  macronutrients 
1. Elements needed by plants in relatively large (primary) or smaller
(secondary) quantities. 2. Foods needed by animals daily or on a
fairly regular basis.  macrophages  A
type of white
blood cell derived from monocytes
that engulf invading antigenic
molecules, viruses,
and microorganisms and then display fragments of the antigen to
activate helper
T cells; ultimately stimulating the
production of antibodies
against the antigen.  malleus One of the
bones comprising the middle ear of mammals.  Malpighian
tubules  The excretory organs of insects; a set of long
tubules that open into the gut.  mammal-like
reptiles Group of Permian-Triassic reptiles having some possible
mammalian features, notably a more prominent dentary (tooth-bearing)
bone and reduction of the incus
and malleus
(which are part of the reptilian jaw along with the dentary). The
mammal-like reptiles are thought to have been the reptile group from
which the mammals later evolved. mantle  In
mollusks, a membranous or muscular structure that surrounds the
visceral mass and secretes a shell if one is present.  marine
biome  The aquatic biome
consisting of waters containing 3.5% salt on average; includes the
oceans and covers more than 70% of the Earth's surface; divided into
benthic
and pelagic
zones. marsupials  Pouched
mammals. The young develop internally, but are born while in an
embryonic state and remain in a pouch on the mother's abdomen until
development is complete; this group includes kangaroos, koalas, and
opossums. One of the three reproductive "strategies" of living
mammals g-laying and placental being the other two), marsupials
finish development in a pouch or under hairy coverings attached to
the mother. mass
extinction  A time during which extinction
rates are generally accelerated so that more than 50% of all species
then living become extinct; results in a marked decrease in the
diversity of organisms. Mass extinctions are thought to have occurred
numerous times in Earth history, often from a variety of reasons:
impacts, tectonism, changes in primary productivity of the seas, etc.
 mast
cells  Cells that synthesize and release
histamine,
as during an allergic response; found most often in connective
tissue surrounding blood vessels.
 matter  Anything
that has mass and occupies space. matter
cycling  The þow of matter through various
organisms and the physical environment of an ecosystem. maximum
sustainable yield (MSY)  The maximum number of a food
or game population
that can be harvested without harming the population's ability to
grow back. medulla  1. A
term referring to the central portion of certain organs; e.g., the
medulla oblongata of the brain and the adrenal medulla, which
synthesizes epinephrine
and norepinephrine.
2. In more common usage, the area in the brain
that regulates breathing, heartbeat, blood pressure and similar
activities. medulla
oblongata  The region of the brain that, with the
pons,
makes up the hindbrain; controls heart rate, constriction and
dilation of blood vessels, respiration, and digestion.
 medusa  The
motile bell-shaped form of body plan in cnidarians; e.g.,
jellyfish. megakarocytes  Cells
found in the bone marrow that produce platelets. megaspores  Four
haploid
cells produced by meiosis
in the ovule
of a þower. Usually, three of these cells degenerate, with the
remaining cell becoming the female gametophyte
phase of the plant's life cycle. Large (palynologists consider the
megaspores to generally be above 200 micrometers in diameter) spores
that develop into the megagametophyte, which in turn produces eggs.
 megaspore
mother cell Cells that undergo meiosis
to produce megaspores.  meiosis  Cell
division in which the chromosomes
replicate, followed by two nuclear divisions. Each of the resulting
gametes
(in animals, spores
in plants) receives a haploid
set of chromosomes. Reduction/division by which ploidy, the number of
sets of homologous
chromosomes, is reduced in the formation
of haploid cells that become gametes (or gametophytes
in plants).  Meissner's
corpuscles  Sensory receptors concentrated in the
epidermis
of the fingers and lips that make these areas very sensitive to
touch. melanin  A
pigment that gives the skin color and protects the underlying layers
against damage by ultraviolet light; produced by melanocytes in the
inner layer of the epidermis. melanocytes  The
cells in the inner layer of the epidermis that produce
melanin. membrane-attack
complex (MAC)  A large cylindrical multiprotein complex
formed by the complement
system; kills invading microorganisms by
embedding in their plasma membrane, creating a pore through which
þuid þows, ultimately causing the cell to burst.

 menstrual
cycle  The recurring secretion of hormones
and associated uterine
tissue changes; typically 28 days in length. 
 menstruation  The
process in which the uterine endometrium
breaks down and sheds cells, resulting in bleeding; occurs
approximately once a month. The first day marks the beginning of the
menstrual and ovarian cycles.  meristematic
tissue  Embryonic tissue located at the tips of stems
and roots and occasionally along their entire length; can divide to
produce new cells; one of the four main tissue systems in plants.
 mesentary
Epithelial
cells supporting the digestive
organs. mesoderm  The
middle layer of cells in embryonic development; gives rise to
muscles, bones, and structures associated with reproduction. The
middle embryonic tissue layer. Cells and structures arising from the
mesoderm include the bone, blood, muscle, skin, and reproductive
organs. mesoglea  A
gel-like matrix that occurs between the outer and inner
epithelial
layers in cnidarians. mesophyll  Layer of
leaf tissue between the epidermis
layers; literally meaning "middle of the leaf".  mesophytic
leaves  The leaves of plants that grow under moderately
humid conditions with abundant soil and water. Mesozoic
Era  The period of geologic
time beginning 245 million years ago and
ending 65 million years ago; the age of the dinosaurs and cycads, the
Mesozoic falls between the Paleozoic
and Cenozoic
Eras and includes the Triassic, Jurassic,
and Cretaceous Periods.  messenger
RNA (mRNA)  "Blueprint" for protein synthesis that is
transcribed
from one strand of the DNA
(gene)
and which is translated
at the ribosome
into a polypeptide sequence. 
 metabolic
pathway  A series of individual chemical reactions in a
living system that combine to perform one or more important
functions. The product of one reaction in a pathway serves as the
substrate for the following reaction. Examples include
glycolysis
and Kreb's
cycle. metabolism  The
sum of all chemical reactions (energy exchanges) in cells. metamorphosis  The
process of changing from one form to another; e.g., in insects, from
the larval stage to the pupal stage to the reproductive adult
stage. metaphase  The
stage of eukaryotic cell division (mitosis
or meiosis)
in which the chromosomes
line up at the equator of the cell. 
 metastasis  The
process in which cancer cells break away from the original tumor mass
and establish new tumor sites elsewhere in the body. methanogens  A
group of archaebacteria
that produce methane as a by product of their metabolism.  methionine  The
amino
acid coded for by the initiation
codon; all polypeptides begin with
methionine, although post-translational reactions may remove
it. micelles  Structures
formed when bile salts surround digested fats in order to enable the
water-insoluble fats to be absorbed by the epithelial
cells lining the small
intestine.  microevolution  A
small-scale evolutionary event such as the formation of a
species
from a preexisting one or the divergence of reproductively isolated
populations
into new species. microfilaments  Rods
composed of actin
that are found in the cytoskeleton
and are involved in cell division and movement. 
1 | 
2 microgametophyte
 Stage of the plant life cycle that develops from or within a
microspore.
The microgametophyte produces sperm in specialized structures known
as antheridia. micronucleus  In
the protistan group known as the ciliates, the small nucleus
containing a single copy of the genome
that is used for sexual reproduction. micronutrients  Elements
that are required by plants in very small quantities, but are toxic
in large quantities: iron, manganese, molybdenum, copper, boron,
zinc, and chloride. micropyle The end of
the embryo
sac where the egg cell and
synergids
are located.  microsporangia
Structures of the sporophyte
in which microspores are produced by meiosis.
In flowering plants the microsporangia are known as anther
sacs. 
 microspore
mother cell  Cells in the microsporangium that undergo
meiosis
to produce microspores. In flowering plants the microspore is known
as the pollen
grain, and contains a three-celled
male. microspores  Four
haploid
cells produced by the meiotic division in the pollen sacs of
þowers or microsporangia of gymnosperms. Microspores undergo
mitotic division and become encased in a thick protective wall to
form pollen
grains. Small, size usually less than 200
micrometers, spores produced by meiosis.
Microspores either germinate into the male gametophyte
or have the male gametophyte develop inside the microspore
wall. microtubules  Filaments
about 25 nanometers in diameter found in cilia,
þagella,
and the cytoskeleton.
 microvilli  Hair-like
projections on the surface of the epithelial
cells of the villi
in the small intestine; increase the surface area of the intestine to
improve absorption of digested nutrients.  midbrain  A
network of neurons
that connects with the forebrain
and relays sensory signals to other integrating centers.
 middle
lamella  A layer composed of pectin that cements two
adjoining plant cells together. migration Movement of
organisms
either permanently (as in the migration of humans to the Americas) or
temporarily (migratory birds such as Canadian geese). mineralocorticoids  A
group of steroid
hormones
produced by the adrenal cortex that are important in maintaining
electrolyte balance. minerals  Trace
elements required for normal metabolism,
as components of cells and tissues, and in nerve conduction and
muscle contraction. minimum
viable population (MVP)  The smallest population
size that can avoid extinction
due to breeding problems or random environmental
þuctuations. mitochondria  Self-replicating
membrane-bound cytoplasmic organelles
in most eukaryotic cells that complete the breakdown of glucose,
producing NADH and ATP
(singular term: mitochondrion). The powerhouse of the cell.
Organelles within eukaryotes that generate (by chemiosmosis)
most of the ATP the cell needs to function and stay alive.
 mitosis  The
division of the cell's nucleus
and nuclear material of a cell; consists of four stages:
prophase,
metaphase,
anaphase,
and telophase.
Cell xeroxing. Mitosis occurs only in eukaryotes.
The DNA of the cell is replicated during interphase of the cell cycle
and then segregated during the four phases of mitosis. mitotic
spindle  A network of microtubules
formed during prophase.
Some microtubules attach to the centromeres
of the chromosomes
and help draw the chromosomes apart during anaphase.
 mold Type of fossil
preservation where the original material of the fossil has decayed
but has left an impression in the surrounding sediments. Molds are
often filled with a different material, producing strikingly
beautiful fossils.  mole Avogadro's number
(6.02 X 1023 atoms) of a substance. molecules  Units
of two or more atoms
held together by chemical bonds. The combination of atoms by chemical
bonds with the component atoms in definite porportions, such as water
(two H to one O). molecular
biology  Field of biology that studies the molecular level of
organization. Monera  Prokaryotic
kingdom that includes (in the most widely accepted classification
system) archaebacteria,
eubacteria,
and cyanobacteria.
Members of this kingdom were among the first forms of life over 3.5
billion years ago. monocots  One
of the two major types of þowering plants; characterized by
having a single cotyledon,
þoral organs arranged in threesd or multiples of three, and
parallel-veined leaves; include grasses, cattails, lilies, and palm
trees. One of the two major groups in the Angiosperms,
monocots are characterized by having a single seed leaf (cotyledon),
flower parts in 3's or multiples of 3, monoaperturate
pollen
(although some dicots also have this feature), parallel veins in
their leaves, and scattered vascular bundles in their stems.
 monoculture  The
growth of only one species in a given area; such as a cornfield or
other agricultural field. monocytes  White
blood cells that clean up dead viruses,
bacteria, and fungi and dispose of dead cells and debris at the end
of the inþammatory
response.  monohybrid
cross  In genetics, a cross that involves only one
characteristic. 
 monomer  An organic
chemical unit linked to other units (usually by a covalent
bond formed by the removal of water) to
produce a larger molecule (macromolecule)
known as a polymer.
 monophyletic
group A group of organisms descended from a common ancestor. For
example: your immediate family may be considered such a group, being
descended from a common ancestral group (grandparents, etc.).
 monosaccharides 
Simple carbohydrates,
usually with a five- or six-carbon skeleton; e.g., glucose
and fructose. A carbohydrate composed of a single sugar unit, such as
glucose, ribose, deoxyribose, etc.  monotremes  Egg-laying
mammals; e.g., the spiny anteater and the duck-billed platypus.
 morph  A
distinct phenotypic
variant within a population. morphological
convergence  The evolution of basically dissimilar
structures to serve a common function. For example: the wings of
birds and insects. morula The solid-ball
stage of the pre-emplantation embryo.
 mosaic
evolution  A pattern of evolution
where all features of an organism
do not evolve at the same rate. Some characteristics are retained
from the ancestral condition while others are more recently
evolved. motor
neurons  Neurons
that receive signals from interneurons
and transfer the signals to effector cells that produce a response.
Nerve cells connected to a muscle or gland. Sometimes also known as
effector
neurons. motor
output  A response to the stimuli received by the
nervous
system. A signal is transmitted to organs
that can convert the signals into action, such as movement or a
change in heart rate. motor
(efferent) pathways  The portion of the
peripheral
nervous system that carries signals from
the central
nervous system to the muscles and
glands. motor
units  Consist of a motor neuron with a group of muscle
fibers; form the units into which skeletal
muscles are organized; enable muscles to
contract on a graded basis. mouth  The oral
cavity; the entrance to the digestive
system where food is broken into pieces by
the teeth and saliva begins the digestion process. mucus  A thick,
lubricating fluid produced by the mucous membranes that line the
respiratory, digestive, urinary, and reproductive tracts; serves as a
barrier against infection and, in the digestive tract, moistens food,
making it easier to swallow. multicellular 
Organisms
composed of multiple cells and exhibiting some division of labor and
specialization of cell structure and function. multinucleate 
Cells having more than one nucleus per cell. muscle
fibers  Long, multinucleated cells found in skeletal
muscles; made up of myofibrils. One of the four major groups of
vertebrate cell/tissue types. Muscle cells contract/relax, allowing
movement of and/or within the animal. 
1 | 
2 | 
3 muscular
system  One of eleven major body organ systems in
animals; allows movement and locomotion, powers the circulatory,
digestive,
and respiratory
systems, and plays a role in regulating temperature.  mutation  Any
heritable change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA;
can involve substitutions, insertions, or deletions of one or more
nucleotides. mutation rate 
The average occurrence of mutations in a species per a given unit of
time. mutualism  A
form of symbiosis
in which both species benefit. A type of symbiosis where both
organisms benefit. The classic example is lichens, which is a
symbiosis between an alga and a fungus. The alga provides food and
the fungus provides water and nutrients. mycelium  The
mass of interwoven filaments of hyphae
in a fungus. mycorrhiza  Occurs
when a fungus (basidiomycete or zygomycete) weaves around or into a
plant's roots and forms a symbiotic relationship. Fungal hyphae
absorb minerals from the soil and pass them on to the plant roots
while the fungus obtains carbohydrates from the plant (pl.:
mycorrhizae). myelin
sheath  Layers of specialized glial
cells, called Schwann
cells, that coat the axons
of many neurons.
 myofibrils  Striated
contractile microfilaments in skeletal
muscle cells.  myosin  Thick
protein filaments in the center sections of sarcomeres.

1 | 
2 



the openings in the nose through which air enters. nastic
movement  A plant's response to a stimulus in which the
direction of the response is independent of the direction of the
stimulus. Non-directional plant movements. natural
selection  The process of differential survival and
reproduction of Þtter genotypes;
can be stabilizing,
directional,
or disruptive.
Better adapted individuals are more likely to survive to reproductive
age and thus leave more offspring and make a larger contribution to
the gene
pool than do less Þt individuals.
The differential survival and reproductive successes of individuals
in a variable population that powers the evolutionary process. When
all individuals survive and reproduce (except for chance occurrences)
natural selection works at a lower rate, if at all. 
 nectaries  Nectar-secreting
organs in þowering plants that serve as insect feeding stations
and thus attract insects, which then assist in the transfer of
pollen. negative
feedback The stopping of the synthesis of an enzyme
by the accumulation of the products of the enzyme-mediated reaction.
 negative
feedback control  Occurs when information produced by
the feedback reverses the direction of the response; regulates the
secretion of most hormones. negative
feedback loop A biochemical pathway where the products of the
reaction inhibit production of the enzyme that controlled their
formation. nektonic
organisms  "Swimmers"; one of the two main types of
organisms in the pelagic zone of the marine biome. nephridium  The
excretory organ in þatworms and other invertebrates; a
blind-ended tubule that expels waste through an excretory
pore. nephron  A
tubular structure that is the Þltering unit of the kidney;
consists of a glomerulus
and renal
tubule.  nerve
cord  A dorsal tubular cord of nervous tissue above the
notochord
of a chordate.  nerve
net  An interconnected mesh of neurons
that sends signals in all directions; found in radially
symmetrical marine invertebrates, such as
jellyÞsh and sea anemones, that have no head region or brain.
 nerves  Bundles
of neuronal processes enclosed in connective
tissue that carry signals to and from the
central
nervous system.  nervous
system  One of eleven major body organ
systems in animals; coordinates and
controls actions of internal organs and body systems, receives and
processes sensory information from the external environment, and
coordinates short-term reactions to these stimuli. 
1 | 
2 | 
3  net
primary productivity (NPP)  The rate at which producer
(usually plants) biomass is created in a community. net
secondary productivity (NSP)  The rate at which
consumer and decomposer biomass is produced in a
community. neural
tube  A tube of ectoderm
in the embryo
that will form the spinal cord. neuromuscular
junction  The point where a motor neuron
attaches to a muscle cell. neurons  Highly
specialized cells that generate and transmit bioelectric impulses
from one part of the body to another; the functional unit of the
nervous
system. A cell of the nerve tissue
having a cell body input zone of dendrites
and an output zone of an axon
(of varying length). The electrochemical nerve impulse/message is
transmitted by neurons. 
1 | 
2 neurotoxin Chemical
that paralyzes nerves. Neurotoxins are produced by a variety of
organisms,
most notably some of the heterotrophic
dinoflagellates.
 neurotransmitters  Chemicals
released from the tip of an axon
into the synaptic
cleft when a nerve impulse arrives; may
stimulate or inhibit the next neuron. The chemical that crosses the
synaptic cleft and causes the transmission of the nerve message in an
adjacent neuron or the stimulation of an effector cell (muscle or
gland).  neutron  An
uncharged subatomic particle in the nucleus
of an atom. The large (mass approximately equal to 1 atomic mass
unit), electrically neutral particle that may occur in the atomic
nucleus.  niche  The
biological role played by a species. niche
overlap  The extent to which two species require
similar resources; speciÞes the strength of the competition
between the two species. nicotine
adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+)  A
substance to which electrons are transferred from photosystem
I during photosynthesis;
the addition of the electrons reduces NADP, which acquires a hydrogen
ion to form NADPH, which is a storage form of energy that can be
transferred to the Calvin Cycle for the production of carbohydrate.
 node  The stem
region of a plant where one or more leaves attach. Where leaves are
attached to stems. node of
Ranvier  A gap between two of the Schwann
cells that make up an axon's
myelin
sheath; serves as a point for generating a
nerve impulse.  nondisjunction  The
failure of chromosomes
to separate properly during cell division. The unequal segregation of
chromosomes during meiosis.
This forms cells with either too many (possibly one or more single or
sets of chromosomes too many) or too few chromosomes. Thought to be a
common cause for Down Syndrome, where sufferers often have an extra
copy of chromosome 21.  nonvascular
plants  Plants lacking lignified vascular
tissue (xylem),
vascularized leaves, and having a free-living, photosynthetic
gametophyte stage that dominates the life cycle. Common examples are
the mosses and liverworts. norepinephrine  A
hormone
produced in the adrenal medulla and secreted under stress;
contributes to the "Þght or þight" response. notochord  In
chordates, a cellular rod that runs the length of the body and
provides dorsal support. Also, a structure of mesoderm
in the embryo
that will become the vertebrae
of the spinal column. The stiff rod-like structure that all members
of the Phylum Chordata develop at some stage during their
life. nuclear
area  In prokaryotic
cells, a region containing the cell's genetic information. Unlike the
nucleus
in eukaryotic
cells, it is not surrounded by a membrane. nuclear
pores  Openings in the membrane of a cell's nuclear
envelope that allow the exchange of materials between the
nucleus
and the cytoplasm.
 nucleic
acids  Polymers composed of nucleotides;
e.g., DNA and RNA. nucleoid  The area of
the prokaryotic
cytoplasm
where the chromatin
is localized. nucleolus  A
round or oval body in the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell; consists of
DNA and RNA and produces ribosomal RNA (pl.: nucleoli).
 nucleosomes  Spherical
bodies formed by coils of chromatin.
The nucleosomes in turn are coiled to form the Þbers that make
up the chromosomes.
 nucleotide
sequences The genetic
code encrypted in the sequence of bases
along a nucleic
acid.  nucleotides  The
subunits of nucleic
acids; composed of a phosphate, a sugar,
and a nitrogen-containing base. The fundamental structural
unit of the nucleic acid group of organic macromolecules. Some
nucleotides are involved in information storage (as nucleotides in
DNA), protein synthesis (as nucleotides in RNA), and energy transfers
(as single nucleotide ATP, GTP, and double nucleotide NADH and
NADPH). nucleus
(atom)  An atom's core; contains protons and one or
more neutrons (except hydrogen, which has no neutrons).  nucleus
(cell)  The largest, most prominent organelle
in eukaryotic
cells; a round or oval body that is surrounded by the nuclear
envelope and contains the genetic information necessary for control
of cell structure and function.  nyctinasty A nastic
movement in a plant that is caused by light and dark.



occipital
lobe  The lobe of the cerebral
cortex located at the rear of the head; is
responsible for receiving and processing visual information.
 oils  Triglycerides
that are liquid at room temperature. oncogenes  Genes
that can activate cell division in cells that normally do not divide
or do so only slowly. A gene that when over-expressed leads to
cancer, but which normally functions in cell division. "one
gene, one enzyme hypothesis  Holds that a
single gene
controls the production, specificity, and activity of each
enzyme
in a metabolic
pathway. Thus, mutation
of such a gene changes the ability of the cell to carry out a
particular reaction and disrupts the entire pathway. "one
gene one polypeptide hypothesis"  A revision of the one
gene, one enzyme hypothesis. Some proteins are composed of different
polypeptide chains encoded by separate genes, so the hypothesis now
holds that mutation in a gene encoding a specifc polypeptide can
alter the ability of the encoded protein to function and thus produce
an altered phenotype. oocyte A cell that
will/is undergo/ing development into a female gamete.
 oogenesis  The
production of ova. The development of a diploid cell into a
haploid ovum or egg cell.  open
community  A community
in which the populations
have different density peaks and range boundaries and are distributed
more or less randomly. opposable  The
capability of being placed against the remaining digits of a hand or
foot; e.g., the ability of the thumb to touch the tips of the fingers
on that hand. opsins  Molecules
in cone cells that bind to pigments, creating a complex that is
sensitive to light of a given wavelength. orders  Taxonomic
subcategories of classes.  Ordovician
extinction  Paleozoic-aged mass
extinction possibly related to glaciation
in the southern-hemisphere supercontinent Gondwana. Ordovician
Period Geologic period of the Paleozoic
Era after the Cambrian
Period between 500 and 435 million years ago. Major advances during
this period include the bony fish and possibly land plants (during
the late Ordovician).  organelles  Cell
components that carry out individual functions; e.g., the cell
nucleus
and the endoplasmic
reticulum. Subcellular structures
(usually membrane-bound and unique to eukaryotes)
that perform some function, e.g. chloroplast,
mitochondrion,
nucleus. 
1 | 
2 organism  An
individual, composed of organ systems (if multicellular). Multiple
organisms make up a population. organs  Differentiated
structures consisting of tissues
and performing some specific function in an organism.
Structures made of two or more tissues which function as an
integrated unit. e.g. the heart, kidneys, liver, stomach. organ
systems  Groups of organs that perform related
functions. orgasm  Rhythmic
muscular contractions of the genitals (sex organs) combined with
waves of intense pleasurable sensations; in males, results in the
ejaculation of semen. osmoconformers  Marine
organisms that have no system of osmoregulation and must change the
composition of their body þuids as the composition of the water
changes; include invertebrates such as jellyÞsh, scallops, and
crabs. osmoregulation  The
regulation of the movement of water by osmosis
into and out of cells; the maintenance of water balance within the
body. osmoregulators  Marine
vertebrates whose body þuids have about one-third the solute
concentration of seawater; must therefore undergo
osmoregulation. osmosis  Diffusion
of water molecules across a membrane in response to differences in
solute concentration. Water moves from areas of high-water/low-solute
concentration to areas of low-water/high-solute concentration.
Diffusion of water across a semi-permeable barrier such as a cell
membrane, from high water potential (concentration) to lower water
potential (concentration). osmotic pressure
 Pressure generated by water moving by osmosis into or out of a
cell. ossification The
process by which embryonic
cartilage is replaced with bone.  osteoarthritis  A
degenerative condition associated with the wearing away of the
protective cap of cartilage at the ends of bones. Bone growths or
spurs develop, restricting movement and causing pain. osteoblasts  Bone-forming
cells.  osteoclasts  Cells
that remove material to form the central cavity in a long bone.
 osteocytes  Bone
cells that lay down new bone; found in the concentric layers of
compact bone. Bone cell, a type of connective tissue.
 osteoporosis  A
disorder in which the mineral portion of bone is lost, making the
bone weak and brittle; occurs most commonly in postmenopausal
women. out of
Africa hypothesis  Holds that modern human populations
(Homo sapiens) are all derived from a single speciation event
that took place in a restricted region in Africa. ovaries  1)
In animals, the female gonads,
which produce eggs (ova) and female sex
hormones. 
2) In þowers, part of the female reproductive structure in the
carpel;
contain the ovules,
where egg development occurs. The lower part of the carpel that
contains the ovules within which the female gametophyte
develops.  overkill  The
shooting, trapping, or poisoning of certain populations,
usually for sport or economic reasons. oviducts  Tubes
that connect the ovaries and the uterus;
transport sperm to the ova, transport the fertilized ova to the
uterus, and serve as the site of fertilization;
also called the fallopian tubes or uterine tubes.  ovulation  The
release of the oocyte
onto the surface of the ovary;
occurs at the midpoint of the ovarian cycle. The release of
the ovum (egg) from the ovary after the peaking of luteinizing
hormone concentration in the blood during
the menstrual
cycle. 
1 | 
2 ovule  In seed
plants, a protective structure in which the female gametophyte
develops, fertilization occurs, and seeds develop; contained within
the ovary. Structures inside the ovary of the flower within
which the female gametophyte develops after megasporogenesis has
produced a megaspore
inside each ovule.  ovum  The female
gamete,
egg. oxidation  The
loss of electrons
from the outer shell of an atom;
often accompanied by the transfer of a proton
and thus involves the loss of a hydrogen ion. The loss of electrons
or hydrogens in a chemical reaction.  oxytocin  A
peptide hormone
secreted by the posterior pituitary
that stimulates the contraction of the uterus
during childbirth. ozone  A
triatomic (O3) form of oxygen that is formed in the
stratosphere when sunlight strikes oxygen atoms. This atmospheric
ozone helps Þlter radiation from the sun. 



sinoatrial
node. Pacinian
corpuscles  Sensory receptors located deep in the
epidermis
that detect pressure and vibration. paleontology The
study of ancient life by collection and analysis of fossils. Paleozoic
Era  The period of time beginning 570 million years ago
ending 245 million years ago; falls between the Proterozoic and
Mesozoic Eras and is divided into the Cambrian, Ordovician, Silurian,
Devonian, Carboniferous, and Permian Periods.  palindrome  A
sequence that reads the same in either direction; in genetics, refers
to an enzyme
recognition sequence that reads the same on both strands of
DNA. palisade  Layer of
mesophyll
cells in leaves that are closely placed
together under the epidermal
layer of the leaf. Palisade parenchyma: Columnar cells located
just below the upper epidermis in leaves the cells where most of the
light absorbtion in photosynthesis
occurs. 
1 | 
2 palynology The study
of palynomorphs and other acid-resistant microfossils usually
produced by plants, protists, and fungi.  palynomorph Generic
term for any object a palynologist studies. pancreas  A
gland in the abdominal cavity that secretes digestive
enzymes
into the small intestine and also secretes the hormones
insulin
and glucagon
into the blood, where they regulate blood glucose levels. A
digestive organ that produces trypsin, chymotrypsin and other enzymes
as a pancreatic juice, but which also has endocrine
functions in the production of the hormones somatostatin,
insulin, and glucagon. pancreatic
islets  Clusters of endocrine
cells in the pancreas that secrete insulin and glucagon; also known
as islets of Langerhans. Pangaea  The name
proposed by German meteorologist Alfred Wegener for a supercontinent
that existed at the end of the Paleozoic
Era and consisted of all the Earth's
landmasses. parallel
evolution  The development of similar characteristics
in organisms
that are not closely related (not part of a monophyletic
group) due to adaptation
to similar environments and/or strategies of life.  parasites  Organisms
that live in, with, or on another organism. The parasites
beneÞt from the association without contributing to the host,
usually they cause some harm to the host. parasitism  A
form of symbiosis
in which the population of one species beneÞts at the expense
of the population of another species; similar to predation, but
differs in that parasites act more slowly than predators and do not
always kill the host. A type of symbiosis in which one
organism benefits at the expense of the other, for example the
influenza virus is a parasite on its human host. Viruses, are
obligate intracellular parasites. parasympathetic
system  The subdivision of the autonomic
nervous system that reverses the effects
of the sympathetic nervous system. Part of the autonomic nervous
system that controls heartbeat, respiration and other vital
functions.  parenchyma  One
of the three major cell types in plants. Parenchyma cells have thin,
usually multisided walls, are unspecialized but carry on
photosynthesis
and cellular respiration
and can store food; form the bulk of the plant body; found in the
þeshy tissue of fruits and seeds, photosynthetic cells of
leaves, and the vascular
system. Generalized plant cells whose
numerous functions include photosynthesis, storage, bulk of
herbaceous stem tissues, lateral transport in woody stems. Parenchyma
are variously shaped but are characterized by thin walls and remain
alive at functional maturity. 
 parietal
lobe  The lobe of the cerebral
cortex that lies at the top of the brain;
processes information about touch, taste, pressure, pain, and heat
and cold.  passive
transport  Diffusion
across a plasma membrane in which the cell expends no
energy. pectin  A
substance in the middle
lamella that cements adjoining plant cells
together. pectoral
girdle  In humans, the bony arch by which the arms are
attached to the rest of the skeleton; composed of the clavicle and
scapula.  pedigree
analysis  A type of genetic analysis in which a trait
is traced through several generations of a family to determine how
the trait is inherited. The information is displayed in a pedigree
chart using standard symbols. pelagic
zone  One of the two basic subdivisions of the marine
biome;
consists of the water above the sea þoor and its
organisms. pelvic
girdle  In humans, the bony arch by which the legs are
attached to the rest of the skeleton; composed of the two hipbones.
 pelvis  The
hollow cavity formed by the two hipbones.  penicillin The first
of the so-called wonder drugs; discovered by Sir Alexander
Fleming. pepsin  An
enzyme
produced from pepsinogen that initiates protein digestion by breaking
down protein into large peptide fragments. An enzyme, produced by the
stomach, that chemically breaks down peptide bonds in polypeptides
and proteins. pepsinogen  An
inactive form of pepsin; synthesized and stored in cells lining the
gastric
pits of the stomach. peptic
ulcer  Damage to the epithelial
layer of the stomach lining; generally
caused by bacterial infection. peptide
bond  A covalent bond that links two amino
acids together to form a polypeptide
chain. A covalent bond between the amine end of one amino acid
and the acid end of another amino acid.  peptides  Short
chains of amino
acids. perichondrium  A
layer of connective tissue that forms around the cartilage during
bone formation. Cells in the perichondrium lay down a peripheral
layer that develops into compact
bone.  perennials  Plants
that persist in the environment for more than one year (as in the
case of annuals). period The fundamental
unit in the hierarchy of time units; a part of geologic
time during which a particular sequence of
rocks designated as a system was deposited. Units of geological time
that are the major subdivisions of Eras. periosteum  A
Þbrous membrane that covers bones and serves as the site of
attachment for skeletal
muscles; contains nerves, blood vessels,
and lymphatic
vessels. peripheral
nervous system  The division of the nervous
system that connects the central
nervous system to other parts of the body.
Components of the nervous system that transmit messages to the
central nervous system. peristalsis  Involuntary
contractions of the smooth
muscles in the walls of the
esophagus,
stomach, and intestines that propel food along the digestive tract.
Waves of muscle contraction in the esophagus that propel food from
the oral cavity to the stomach.  Permian Period
The last geologic
time period of the Paleozoic
Era, noted for the greatest mass
extinction in earth history, when nearly 96% of species died out.
 peroxisomes  Membrane-bound
vesicles
in eukaryotic
cells that contain oxidative enzymes. pesticides Chemicals
that are applied to agricultural crops or domesticated plants and
which kill or inhibit growth of insects.  petals  Usually
brightly colored elements of a þower
that may produce fragrant oils; nonreproductive structures that
attract pollinators. Sterile leaf-like (white, colorless, but usually
colored) structures in flowers that serve to attract pollinators.
 petiole  The generally
non-leafy part of the leaf that attaches the leaf blade to the stem;
celery and rhubarb are examples of a leaf petiole that we use as
food. The stalk connecting the leaf blade to the stem.
 petrifaction Mode
of fossilization where f organic matter is replaced with silica.
 PGA
(phosphoglycerate)  A three-carbon molecule formed when
carbon dioxide is added to ribulose biphosphate (RuBP) during the
dark
reaction of photosynthesis
(Calvin,
or Calvin-Benson Cycle). PGA is converted
to PGAL, using ATP and NADPH.  PGAL
(phosphoglyceraldehyde)   A substance formed from PGA
during the dark
reaction of photosynthesis.
Some PGAL leaves the cycle and can be converted to glucose, while
other PGAL molecules are used to reform ribulose biphosphate (RuBP)
to continue the dark reaction. pH  The negative logarithm
of the H+ ion concentration. The pH is a measure of the
acidity or basic character of a solution. Since it measures a
fraction, the larger the pH number, the less H ions are present in a
solution.  phagocytes  White
blood cells that can engulf (by
phagocytosis) and destroy microorganisms including viruses and
bacteria; cells in this category include neutrophils and
monocytes. phagocytosis  A
form of endocytosis
in which white
blood cells surround and engulf invading
bacteria or viruses.  pharynx  The
passageway between the mouth and the esophagus
and trachea.
Food passes from the pharynx to the esophagus, and air passes from
the pharynx to the trachea. phenotype  The
observed properties or outward appearance of a trait. The physical
expression of the alleles
posessed by an organism. pheromones  Chemical
signals that travel between organisms rather than between cells
within an organism; serve as a form of communication between
animals. phloem  Tissue
in the vascular
system of plants that moves dissolved
sugars and other products of photosynthesis from the leaves to other
regions of the plant. Phloem tissue consists of cells called
sieve
tubes and companion
cells. Cells of the vascular system in
plants that transport food from leaves to other areas of the plant.

1 | 
2 | 
3 phosphate
group A chemical group composed of a central phosphorous bonded
to three or four oxygens. The net charge on the group is negative.
 phospholipids  Asymmetrical
lipid
molecules with a hydrophilic
head and a hydrophobic
tail. Lipids with a phosphate group in place of one of the three
fatty acid chains. Phospholipids are the building blocks of cellular
membranes. Phospholipids have hydrophilic heads (glycerol and
phosphate) and hydrophobic tails (the non-polar fatty acids).
 phosphorylation
The chemical attachment of phosphorous to a molecule, usually
associated with the storage of energy in the covalent
bond that is also formed. Example:
attachment of the third phosphate group to ADP
in the formation of the higher energy form, ATP.
Photophosphorylation is a type of phosphorylation associated with the
formation of ATP in the photosynthesis
process.  photic
zone  The layer of the ocean that is penetrated by
sunlight; extends to a depth of about 200 meters. photoperiodism  The
ability of certain plants to sense the relative amounts of light and
dark in a 24-hour period; controls the onset of þowering in
many plants. photosynthesis  The
process by which plant cells use solar energy to produce
ATP.
The conversion of unusable sunlight energy into usable chemical
energy, associated with the actions of chlorophyll.
 photosystems  Clusters
of several hundred molecules of chlorophyll
in a thylakoid
in which photosynthesis takes place. Eukaryotes
have two types of photosystems: I and II. The series of green
photoreceptive pigments involved in the light
reactions, which occur in the thylakoids
of the chloroplast (in eukaryotes). Energy from light is passed to
the electrons as they move through the photosystem pigments.

1 | 
2 | 
3 | 
4 phototrophs  Organisms
that use sunlight to synthesize organic nutrients as their energy
source; e.g., cyanobacteria,
algae, and plants. phototropism  The
reaction of plants to light in which the plants bend toward the
light. Plant response to light by unequal growth caused by
concentration of the plant hormone
Indole Acetic Acid (IAA, an auxin)
on the darker side of the plant shoot.  phycocyanin An
accessory pigment found in cyanobacteria
and the chloroplasts of red
algae. phycoerythrin  An
accessory pigment found in cyanobacteria
and the chloroplasts of red
algae. phylogeny 1) the
study of evolutionary relationships within a monophyletic
group. 2) evolutionary hypotheses represented as a dendrogram or
branching diagram. 
1 | 
2 phylogenetic 
Pertaining to a phylogeny. phylum  The
broadest taxonomic category within kingdoms (pl.: phyla).
 phytochrome  A
pigment in plant leaves that detects day length and generates a
response; partly responsible for photoperiodism. phytoplankton  A
þoating layer of photosynthetic
organisms, including algae, that are an important source of
atmospheric oxygen and form the base of the aquatic food
chain. pilus Projection from
surface of a bacterial cell (F+) that can donate genetic material to
another (F-).  pineal
gland  A small gland located between the cerebral
hemispheres of the brain that secretes melatonin. pioneer
community  The initial community
of colonizing species. pistil  Female
reproductive structures in flowers, consisting of the
stigma,
style,
and ovary.
Also known as a carpel
in some books. 
1 | 
2 pith  Central area in
plant stems, largely composed of parenchyma
tissue modified for storage. 
1 | 
2 pituitary
gland  A small gland located at the base of the brain;
consists of an anterior and a posterior lobe and produces numerous
hormones.
The master gland of the endocrine
system, the pituitary releases hormones
that have specific targets as well as those that stimulate other
glands to secrete hormones. Part of the pituitary is nerve tissue,
the rest is glandular epithelium.

1 | 
2 placenta  An
organ produced from interlocking maternal and embryonic tissue in
placental mammals; supplies nutrients to the embryo and fetus and
removes wastes.  placental
mammals One of three groups of mammals that carry their young in
the mother's body for long periods during which the fetus is
nourished by the placenta. Humans are placental mammals. planaria  Small
free-living þatworms (Phylum Platyhelminthes) with bilateral
symmetry and cephalization.
The freshwater type is often used as an experimental
organism. planktonic
organisms  "Floaters"; one of the two main types of
organisms in the pelagic zone of the marine biome. Plantae  The plant
kingdom; nonmobile, autotrophic,
multicellular
eukaryotes. Kingdom of the plants, autotrophic eukaryotes with
cellulose
in their cell walls and starch as a carbohydrate storage product,
with chlorophylls
a and b
as photosynthesis
pigments.  plasma  The
liquid portion of the blood. Along with the extracellular þuid,
it makes up the internal environment of multicellular
organisms. plasma
cells  Cells produced from B
cells that synthesize and release
antibodies.

 plasmids  Self-replicating,
circular DNA molecules found in bacterial cells; often used as
vectors in recombinant
DNA technology.  Small circles of
double-stranded DNA found in some bacteria. Plasmids can carry from
four to 20 genes. Plasmids are a commonly used vector in recombinant
DNA studies.  plasmodesmata  Junctions
in plants that penetrate cell walls and plasma membranes, allowing
direct communication between the cytoplasm of adjacent cells (sing.:
plasmodesma). plasmolysis 
Osmotic
condition in which a cell loses water to its outside environment.
 plastids  Membrane-bound
organelles in plant cells that function in storage (of food or
pigments) or food production. Term for any double membrane-bound
organelle. Chloroplasts
contain the chemicals for photosynthesis,
amyloplasts (also known as leukoplasts) store starch, chromoplasts
contain colorful pigments such as in the petals of a flower or
epidermis of a fruit. platelets  In
vertebrates,
cell fragments that bud off from the megakaryocytes
in the bone marrow; carry chemicals needed for blood clotting. Cell
fragment functioning in blood clotting. plate
tectonics  The movement of the plates that make up the
surface of the Earth. The revolutionary paradigm in geology that the
earth's crust is composed of rigid segments (plates) in constant
(although considered slow in a human-scale time frame) motion
(tectonics) relative to each other. pleiotropic A term
describing a genotype
with multiple phenotypic
effects. For example: sickle-cell
anemia produces a multitude of
consequences in those it affects, such as heart disease, jidney
problem, etc. Pleistocene The
first geologic epoch of the Quaternary Period of the Cenozoic
Era that ended 10,000 years ago with the
retreat of the last glaciers.  pleura  A thin
sheet of epithelium
that covers the inside of the thoracic
cavity and the outer surface of the
lungs. pleural
cavity  The space between the sheets of pleura (one
covering the inside of the thoracic cavity, the other covering the
outside of the lungs). polar
covalent bond  A covalent
bond in which atoms share electrons in an
unequal fashion. The resulting molecule has regions with positive and
negative charges. The presence of polar covalent bonds allows other
polar molecules to surround molecule: example: glucose sugar in
water. pollen
grains  The containers for male gametophytes
of seed plants produced in a microsporangium
by meiosis. Microspores
produced by seed plants that contain the male gametophyte.
 pollen tube 
Structure produced by the tube nucleus in the pollen grain through
which the sperm nucleus (or nuclei in angiosperms)
proceed to travel through to reach the egg.  pollination  The
transfer of pollen from the anthers
to the stigma
by a pollinating agent such as wind, insects, birds, bats, or in a
few cases the opening of the flower itself. polygenic
inheritance  Occurs when a trait is controlled by
several gene pairs; usually results in continuous variation.
 polymer  Organic
molecule composed of smaller units known as monomers.
A large molecule composed of smaller subunits, for example starch is
a polymer of glucose, proteins are polymers of amino
acids. polymerase
chain reaction (PCR)  A method of amplifying or copying
DNA
fragments that is faster than cloning. The fragments are combined
with DNA
polymerase, nucleotides,
and other components to form a mixture in which the DNA is cyclically
amplified. polynucleotides  Long
chains of nucleotides
formed by chemical links between the sugar and phosphate
groups. polyp  The
sessile form of life history in cnidarians; e.g., the freshwater
hydra. polyploidy  Abnormal
variation in the number of chromosome
sets. The condition when a cell or organism has more than the
customary two sets of chromosomes. This is an especially effective
speciation mechanism in plants since the extra chromosomes will
establish reproductive isolation with the parental population(s), an
essential for speciation. 
1 | 
2 polysaccharides  Long
chains of monosaccharide
units bonded together; e.g., glycogen,
starch, and cellulose.
 pons  The region
that, with the medulla
oblongata, makes up the hindbrain, which
controls heart rate, constriction and dilation of blood vessels,
respiration, and digestion.  population  A
group of individuals of the same species
living in the same area at the same time and sharing a common
gene
pool. A group of potentially interbreeding
organisms in a geographic area. population
dynamics  The study of the factors that affect the
growth, stability, and decline of populations, as well as the
interactions of those factors. portal
system  An arrangement in which capillaries
drain into a vein that opens into another capillary
network. positive
feedback  Biochemical control where the accumulation of the
product stimulates production of an enzyme
responsible for that product's production. positive
feedback control  Occurs when information produced by
the feedback increases and accelerates the response. precambrian 
Informal term describing 7/8 of geologic time from the beginning of
the earth to the beginning of the Cambrian
Period of the Paleozoic
Era. During this time the atmosphere and
oceans formed, life originated (or possibly "colonized" Earth),
eukaryotes and simple animals evolved and by the end of the
precambrian they began to accumulate hard preservable parts, the
common occurrence of which marks the beginning of the Cambrian.
 precipitation  The
part of the hydrologic cycle in which the water vapor in the
atmosphere falls to Earth as rain or snow. predation  One
of the biological interactions that can limit population growth;
occurs when organisms kill and consume other living
organisms. predatory
release  Occurs when a predator species is removed from
a prey species such as by great reduction in the predator's
population size or by the migration of the prey species to an area
without major predators. The removal of the predator releases the
prey from one of the factors limiting its population size. prehensile
movement  The ability to seize or grasp. prenatal
testing  Testing to detect the presence of a genetic
disorder in an embryo or fetus; commonly done by amniocentesis
or chorionic
villi sampling. presymptomatic
screening  Testing to detect genetic disorders that
only become apparent later in life. The tests are done before the
condition actually appears, such as with Huntington
disease. prey
switching  The tendency of predators to switch to a
more readily available prey when one prey species becomes rare;
allows the Þrst prey population to rebound and helps prevent
its extinction. primary cell
wall  The cell wall outside the plasma membrane that
surrounds plant cells; composed of the polysaccharide
cellulose. primary body
Those parts of a plant produced by the shoot and root apical
meristems. primary
compounds  Chemicals made by plants and needed for the plant's
own metabolism. primary growth
 Cells produced by an apical
meristem. The growth a plant by the
actions of apical meristems on the shoot and root apices in producing
plant primary tisues.  primary
macronutrients  Elements that plants require in
relatively large quantities: nitrogen, phosphorus, and
potassium. primary
meristems  The apical
meristems on the shoot and root apices in
plants that produce plant primary tissues. primary
root  The Þrst root formed by a plant. primary
structure  The sequence of amino
acids in a protein.  primates The
taxonomic
order
of mammals that includes prosimians (lemurs and tarsiers), monkeys,
apes, and humans; characteristics include large brain, stereoscopic
vision, and grasping hand. principle
of independent assortment  Mendel's second law; holds
that during gamete
formation, alleles
in one gene pair segregate into gametes independently of the alleles
of other gene pairs. As a result, if enough gametes are produced, the
collective group of gametes will contain all combinations of alleles
possible for that organism. principle
of segregation  Mendel's Þrst law; holds that
each pair of factors of heredity separate during gamete formation so
that each gamete receives one member of a pair. prions  Infectious
agents composed only of one or more protein molecules without any
accompanying genetic information. producers  The
Þrst level in a food
pyramid; consist of organisms that
generate the food used by all other organisms in the ecosystem;
usually consist of plants making food by photosynthesis. progesterone One
of the two female reproductive hormones
secreted by the ovaries. prokaryote  Type
of cell that lacks a membrane-bound nucleus
and has no membrane organelles; a bacterium. Prokaryotes are more
primitive than eukaryotes.
Cells lacking membrane-bound organelles and having a single circular
chromosome,
and ribosomes
surrounded by a cell membrane. Prokaryotes were the first forms of
life on earth, evolving over 3.5 billion years ago. prolactin  A
hormone
produced by the anterior
pituitary; secreted at the end of
pregnancy when it activates milk production by the mammary
glands. promoter  The
speciÞc nucleotide
sequence in DNA
that marks the beginning of a gene.
 prophase  1)
The Þrst stage of mitosis
during which chromosomes
condense, the nuclear envelope disappears, and the centrioles
divide and migrate to opposite ends of the cell. 2) The first stage
of mitosis and meiosis
(although in meiosis this phase is denoted with either a roman
numeral I or II) where the chromatin condenses to form chromosomes,
nucleolus
dissolves, nuclear envelope dissolves, and the spindle
begins to form.  prostaglandins  A
class of fatty acids that has many of the properties of
hormones;
synthesized and secreted by many body tissues and have a variety of
effects on nearby cells. prostate
gland  A gland that is located near and empties into
the urethra;
produces a secretion that enhances sperm viability. Gland involved in
the reproductive
system in males, the prostate secretes a
sperm activating chemical into the semen
during the arousal/ejaculation response.  proteinoids  Polymers
of amino
acids formed spontaneously from inorganic
molecules; have enzyme-like
properties and can catalyze chemical reactions. proteins  Polymers
made up of amino
acids that perform a wide variety of
cellular functions. One of the classes of organic macromolecules that
function as structural and control elements in living systems.
Proteins are polymers of amino acids linked together by peptide
bonds. prothallus  In
ferns, a small heart-shaped bisexual gametophyte.
 Protista  The
taxonomic
Kingdom
from which the other three eukaryotic
kingdoms (Fungi,
Animalia
and Plantae)
are thought to have evolved. The earliest eukaryotes were
single-celled organisms that would today be placed in this admittedly
not monophyletic
group. The endosymbiosis
theory suggests that eukaryotes may have evolved independently
several times. protists  Single-celled
organisms; a type of eukaryote. Protista proton  A
subatomic particle in the nucleus of an atom
that carries a positive charge. The positively charged (+1) subatomic
particle located in the atomic
nucleus and having a mass slightly less
than that of a neutron.
Elements
differ by the number of protons in their atoms. protostomes  Animals
in which the Þrst opening that appears in the embryo
becomes the mouth; e.g., mollusks, annelids, and
arthropods. protozoa Single-celled
protists grouped by their method of locomotion. This group includes
Paramecium, Amoeba, and many other commonly observed
protists. 
1 | 
2 proximal
tubule  The winding section of the renal
tubule where most reabsorption of water,
sodium, amino acids, and sugar takes place.  pseudocoelom  In
nematodes, a closed þuid-containing cavity that acts as a
hydrostatic
skeleton to maintain body shape, circulate
nutrients, and hold the major body organs. pseudocoelomates  Animals
that have a body cavity that is in direct contact with the outer
muscular layer of the body and does not arise by splitting of the
mesoderm;
e.g., roundworms. pseudopodia  Temporary
cytoplasmic extensions from a cell that enables it to move (sing.:
pseudopodium).  pulmonary
artery  The artery
that carries blood from the right ventricle
of the vertebrate heart to the lungs. Artery carrying oxygen-poor
blood from the heart to the lungs.  pulmonary
circuit  The loop of the circulatory
system that carries blood to and from the
lungs.  pulmonary
vein  The vein
that carries oxygenated blood from the lungs to the left atrium of
the heart. Veins carrying oxygenated blood from the lungs to
the heart.  punctuated
equilibrium  A model that holds that the evolutionary
process is characterized by long periods with little or no change
interspersed with short periods of rapid speciation. purine  One of the
groups of nitrogenous bases that are part of a nucleotide.
Purines are adenine
and guanine,
and are double-ring structures.  pyloric
sphincter  The ring of muscle at the junction of the
stomach and small intestine that regulates the movement of food into
the small intestine.  pyrimidine  One of
the groups of nitrogenous bases that are part of a nucleotide.
Pyrimidines are single ringed, and consist of the bases
thymine
(in DNA), uracil
(replacing thymine in RNA), and cytosine.
 quantum
models of speciation  Models of evolution that hold
that speciation sometimes occurs rapidly as well as over long
periods, as the classical theory proposed. Quaternary
Period The most recent geologic period of the Cenozoic
Era, the Quaternary began 2 million years
ago with the growth of northern hemisphere continental glaciers and
the ice
age.  quaternary
structure  In some proteins,
a fourth structural level created by interactions with other
proteins. Aspect of protein structure determined by the number and
arrangement of polypeptides in a large protein such as hemoglobin.
 



subdivision of a species that is capable of interbreeding with other
members of the species. radially
symmetrical  In animals, refers to organisms with their
body parts arranged around a central axis. Such animals tend to be
circular or cylindrical in shape. radiation  Energy
emitted from the unstable nuclei of radioactive isotopes. radioactive
decay The spontaneous decay of an atom
to an atom of a different element
by emission of a particle from its nucleus (alpha and beta decay) or
by electron capture. radioisotope Term
applied to a radioactive isotope,
such as carbon-14 or uranium 238. Radioisotope nuclei are unstable
and spontaneously breakdown and emit one of a number of types of
radiation.  radiometric
time Type of absolute
time determined by the relative
porportions of radioisotopes to stable daughter isotopes.
 ray-finned  Taxonomic
group of fish, such as trout, tuna, salmon, and bass, that have thin,
bony supports holding the Þns away from the body and an
internal swim bladder that changes the buoyancy of the body; one of
the two main types of bony Þshes. reabsorption  The
return to the blood of most of the water, sodium, amino acids, and
sugar that were removed during Þltration; occurs mainly in the
proximal
tubule of the nephron. receptacle  The
base that attaches a þower to the stem.  receptor Protein on or
protruding from the cell surface to which select chemicals can bind.
The opiate receptor in brain cells allows both the natural chemical
as well as foreign (opiate) chemicals to bind. recessive  Refers
to an allele
of a gene
that is expressed when the dominant
allele is not present. An allele expressed only in homozygous
form, when the dominant allele is absent. recombinant
DNA molecules  New combinations of DNA
fragments formed by cutting DNA segments from two sources with
restriction
enzyme and then joining the fragments
together with DNA ligase. Interspecies transfer of genes usually
through a vector such as a virus or plasmid. recombinant
DNA technology  A series of techniques in which DNA
fragments are linked to self-replicating forms of DNA to create
recombinant DNA molecules. These molecules in turn are replicated in
a host cell to create clones of the inserted segments. recombination  A
way in which meiosis
produces new combinations of genetic information. During
synapsis,
chromatids
may exchange parts with other chromatids, leading to a physical
exchange of chromosome parts; thus, genes
from both parents may be combined on the same chromosome, creating a
new combination. red algae  Common
name for the algae placed in the division Rhodophyta. red blood cell
Component of the blood that transports oxygen with the hemoglobin
molecule. See also erythrocyte
 red tides 
Phenomenon associated with population explosions (blooms) of certain
types of dinoflagellates;
red structures inside the dinoflagellates cause the water to have a
reddish color. 
 reduction  The
gain of an electron or a hydrogen atom. The gain of electrons or
hydrogens in a chemical reaction. reductional
division  The Þrst division in meiosis;
results in each daughter cell receiving one member of each pair of
chromosomes.
 reflex  A
response to a stimulus that occurs without conscious effort; one of
the simplest forms of behavior. reflex arc Pathway
of neurons,
effector(s) and sensory receptors that participate in a
reflex. region of
division  The area of cell division in the tip of a
plant root.  region of
elongation  The area in the tip of a plant root where
cells grow by elongating, thereby increasing the length of the root.
 region
of maturation (differentiation)  The area where primary
tissues and root
hairs develop in the tip of a plant root.
 relative time
Type of geologic
time (absolute
time being the other) that places events
in a sequence relative to each other. renal
tubule  The portion of the nephron
where urine
is produced.  renin  An
enzyme
secreted by the kidneys that converts angiotensinogen into
angiotensin II. replication 
Process by which DNA
is duplicated prior to cell division.  reproductive
isolating mechanism  Biological or behavioral
characteristics that reduce or prevent interbreeding with other
populations; e.g., the production of sterile hybrids. Establishment
of reproductive isolation is considered essential for development of
a new species. reproductive
system  One of eleven major body organ
systems in animals; is responsible for
reproduction and thus the survival of the species.  reptiles Taxonomic
class of vertebrates
characterized by scales and amniotic eggs; the first truly
terrestrial vertebrate group. resolution  In
relation to microscopes, the ability to view adjacent objects as
distinct structures. resource
partitioning  The division of resources such that a few
dominant species exploit most of the available resources while other
species divide the remainder; helps explain why a few species are
abundant in a community while others are represented by only a few
individuals. respiration 1)
breathing as part of gas exchange; or 2) cellular
metabolism. respiratory
surface  A thin, moist, epithelial
surface that oxygen can cross to move into the body and carbon
dioxide can cross to move out of the body. respiratory
system  One of eleven major body organ
systems in animals; moves oxygen from the
external environment into the internal environment and removes carbon
dioxide from the body.  resting
potential  The difference in electrical charge across
the plasma membrane of a neuron. restriction
enzymes  A series of enzymes
that attach to DNA
molecules at speciÞc nucleotide
sequences and cut both strands of DNA at
those sites. A bacterial enzyme that cuts DNA at a specific
recognition sequence. This is a bacterial defense against viral DNA
and plasmid
DNA and is now used as an important tool in biotechnology. restriction
fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)  A heritable
difference in DNA fragment length and fragment number; passed from
generation to generation in a codominant way. retina  The
inner, light-sensitive layer of the eye; includes the
rods
and cones. retroviruses  Viruses
that contain a single strand of RNA
as their genetic material and reproduce by copying the RNA into a
complementary DNA strand using the enzyme
reverse
transcriptase. The single-stranded DNA is
then copied, and the resulting double-stranded DNA is inserted into a
chromosome of the host cell. 
1 | 
2 | 
3 | 
4 reverse
transcriptase  An enzyme
used in the replication of retroviruses; aids in copying the
retrovirus's RNA into a complementary
strand of DNA
once inside the host cell. 
1 | 
2 | 
3 reverse
transcription  Process of transcribing
a single-stranded DNA
from a single-stranded RNA
(the reverse of transcription); used by retroviruses as well as in
biotechnology. rheumatoid
arthritis  A crippling form of arthritis that begins
with inþammation and thickening of the synovial membrane,
followed by bone degeneration and disÞgurement. rhizoids  Filamentous
structures in the plants group known as bryophytes
that attach to a substrate and absorb moisture. The term is also
applied to similar structures found outside the
bryophytes. rhizome  In
ferns, a horizontal stem with upright leaves containing
vascular
tissue. rhodopsin  A
visual pigment contained in the rods
of the retina
in the eye.. ribonucleic
acid (RNA) Nucleic acid containing ribose sugar and the base
Uracil;
RNA functions in protein synthesis. The single starnded molecule
transcribed
from one strand of the DNA.
There are three types of RNA, each is involved in protein synthesis.
RNA is made up nucleotides containing the sugar ribose, a phosphate
group, and one of four nitrogenous bases (adenine,
uracil,
cytosine
or guanine).
 ribose  Sugar found in
nucleotides of RNA and in ATP.
 ribosomal RNA 
One of the three types of RNA; rRNA is a structural component in
ribosomes. ribosomal
subunits  Two units that combine with mRNA
to form the ribosomal-mRNA complex at which protein synthesis
occurs. ribosomes  Small
organelles
made of rRNA and protein in the cytoplasm
of prokaryotic
and eukaryotic
cells; aid in the production of proteins on the rough
endoplasmic
reticulum and ribosome complexes. The site
of protein synthesis. The ribosome is composed of two subunits that
attach to the mRNA at the beginning of protein synthesis and detach
when the polypeptide has been translated.  RNA
polymerase  During transcription,
an enzyme
that attaches to the promoter region of the DNA template, joins
nucleotides
to form the synthesized strand of RNA and detaches from the template
when it reaches the terminator region.  RNA transcript
 Term applied to RNA transcribed
in the nucleus.
 Rodinia Name applied to
the precambrian supercontinent.  rods  Light
receptors in primates' eyes that provide vision in dim
light. root cap Structure
that covers and protects the apical
meristem in plant roots. Cells forming a
protective series of layers over the root meristem.
 root hairs 
Extensions of the root epidermis
that increase the root's ability to absorb water.  root-leaf-vascular
system axis  Refers to the arrangement in
vascular
plants in which the roots anchor the plant
and absorb water and nutrients, the leaves carry out photosynthesis,
and the vascular
system connects the roots and leaves,
carrying water and nutrients to the leaves and carrying sugars and
other products of photosynthesis from the leaves to other regions of
the plant.  roots  Organs,
usually occurring underground, that absorb nutrients and water and
anchor the plant; one of the three major plant organ
systems.  root system 
Plant organ
systems that anchors the plant in place,
stores excess sugars, and absorbs water and mineral nutrients. That
part of the plant below ground level.  RuBP Ribulose biphosphate;
the 5-carbon chemical that combines with carbon dioxide at the
beginning of the Calvin
Cycle.  



of interphase
when new DNA
is synthesized as part of replication of the chromatin.
 salivary
amylase  An enzyme
secreted by the salivary glands that begins the breakdown of complex
sugars and starches. salivary
glands  Glands that secrete salvia into the
mouth. saprophytes  Organisms
that obtain their nutrients from decaying plants and animals.
Saprophytes are important in recycling organic material. sapwood  Layers
of secondary
xylem that are still functional in older
woody plants; visible as the outer lighter areas in the cross section
of a tree trunk. sarcomeres  The
functional units of skeletal
muscle; consist of Þlaments of
myosin
and actin.
 saturated fat 
A fat with single covalent
bonds between the carbons of its fatty
acids.  Schwann
cells  Specialized glial
cells that form the myelin
sheath that coats many axons.
Cells surrounding the axons of some neurons,
thus forming the myelin sheath.  scientific
method  Systematic apporach of observation, hypothesis
formation, hypothesis testing and hypothesis evaluation that forms
the basis for modern science. sclereids Plant cells
with thick secondary walls that provide the gritty textures in pears.
 sclerenchyma  One
of the three major cell types in plants; have thickened, rigid,
secondary walls that are hardened with lignin;
provide support for the plant. Sclerenchyma cells include Þbers
and sclereids. Plant tissue type consisting of elongated cells with
thickened secondary walls for support of the plant. 
1 | 
2 scrotum  In
mammals, a pouch of skin located outside the body cavity into which
the testes descend; provides proper temperature for the
testes.
 secondary
cell wall  In woody plants, a second wall inside the
primary cell wall; contains alternating layers of cellulose
and lignin. secondary
compounds  Plant products that are not important in
metabolism
but serve other purposes, such as attracting animals for
pollination
or killing parasites. secondary
extinction  The death of one population due to the
extinction of another, often a food species. secondary growth
 Cells in a plant that are produced by a cambium.
Increase in girth of a plant due to the action of lateral
meristems
such as the vascular
cambium. The main cell produced in
secondary growth is secondary
xylem, better known as wood.

1 | 
2 | 
3 secondary
immunity  Resistance to an antigen
the second time it appears. Because of the presence of
B
and T
memory cells produced during the Þrst exposure to the antigen,
the second response is faster and more massive and lasts longer than
the primary immune response.  secondary
macronutrients  Elements that plants require in
relatively small quantities: calcium, magnesium, and
sulfur. secondary
(lateral) meristems  Plant meristems
that produce secondary growth from a cambium. secondary phloem
Phloem
produced by the vascular
cambium in a woody plant stem or
root. secondary
structure  The structure of a protein
created by the formation of hydrogen
bonds between different amino
acids; can be a pleated sheet, alpha
helix, or random coil. Shape of a protein caused by attraction
between R-groups of amino acids.  secondary xylem
 Xylem
produced by the vascular
cambium in a woody plant stem or root;
wood.
 second
law of thermodynamics (entropy) The energy
available after a chemical reaction is less than that at the
beginning of a reaction; energy conversions are not 100%
efficient. second
messenger  The mechanism by which nonsteroid
hormones
work on target cells. A hormone binds to receptors on the cell's
plasma membrane activating a molecule&emdash;the second
messenger&emdash;that activates other intracellular molecules that
elicit a response. The second messenger can be cyclic AMP, cyclic
GMP, inositol triphosphate, diacrylglycerol, or calcium.

1 | 
2 | 
3 secretin  A
hormone
produced in the duodenum
that stimulates alkaline secretions by the pancreas
and inhibits gastric emptying. secretion  The
release of a substance in response to the presence of food or
speciÞc neural or hormonal stimulation. sediment  Loose
aggregate of solids derived from preexisting rocks, or solids
precipitated from solution by inorganic chemical processes or
extracted from solution by organisms. sedimentary
rock  Any rock composed of sediment, i.e., solid
particles and dissolved minerals. Examples include rocks that form
from sand or mud in riverbeds or on the sea bottom. seed  Structure produced
by some plants in which the next generation sporophyte
is surrounded by gametophyte
nutritive tissues. An immature sporophyte in an arrested state of
development, surrounded by a protective seed coat.  seed coat  The
tough outer layer of the seed, derived from the outer layers of the
ovule.
 segments  Repeating
units in the body parts of some animals. segregation 
Separation of replicated chromosomes
to opposite sides of the cell. Distribution of alleles
on chromosomes into gametes
during meiosis. selective
breeding  The selection of individuals with desirable
traits for use in breeding. Over many generations, the practice leads
to the development of strains with the desired
characteristics. selectively
permeable Term describing a barrier that allows some chemicals to
pass but not others. The cell membrane is such a barrier. semen  A
mixture of sperm
and various glandular secretions. semiconservative
replication  Process of DNA
replication
in which the DNA helix is unwound and each strand serves as a
template for the synthesis of a new complementary strand, which is
linked to the old strand. Thus, one old strand is retained in each
new molecule.  semilunar
valve  A valve between each ventricle
of the heart and the artery
connected to that ventricle.  seminal
vesicles  Glands that contribute fructose to
sperm.
The fructose serves as an energy source. The structures that add
fructose and hormones
to semen.  seminiferous
tubules  Tubules on the interior of the
testes
where sperm
are produced.  sensor  In a
closed system, the element that detects change and signals the
effector
to initiate a response. sensory
cortex  A region of the brain associated with the
parietal
lobe. sensory
input  Stimuli that the nervous
system receives from the external or
internal environment; includes pressure, taste, sound, light, and
blood pH. sensory
neurons  Neurons
that carry signals from receptors and transmit information about the
environment to processing centers in the brain and spinal cord.
Neurons carrying messages from sensory receptors to the spinal cord.
Sometimes referred to as an afferent neuron.  sensory
(afferent) pathways  The portion of the
peripheral
nervous system that carries information
from the organs and tissues of the body to the central
nervous system. sepals  Modified
leaves that protect a flower's inner petals and reproductive
structures. Small, leaf-like structures in flowers that enclose and
protect the developing flower. These are often green, but in many
monocots they are the same color as the petals (in which case the
term tepal is applied since sepals and petals look so much
alike). separation Splitting
of the cytoplasm
by cytokinesis (= cytokinesis). severe
combined immunodeficiency (SCID)  A genetic disorder in
which afþicted individuals have no functional immune system and
are prone to infections. Both the cell-mediated
immune response and the antibody-mediated
response are absent. sex
chromosomes  The chromosomes
that determine the sex of an organism. In humans, females have two
X
chromosomes, and males have one X
chromosome and one Y chromosome. Chromosome that determines the
gender (sex) of the individual. Human males have a large X and a
smaller Y sex chromosomes, while human females have two X sex
chromosomes.  sex
hormones  A group of steroid hormones
produced by the adrenal cortex. Hormones that are produced in the
gonads
and promoted development and maintainence of the secondary sex
characteristics and structures, prepare the female for pregnancy, and
aid in development of gametes.
Males produce testosterone,
while females produce estrogen
and progesterone. sex
linkage  The condition in which the inheritance of a
sex chromosome is coupled with that of a given gene;
e.g., red-green color blindness and hemophilia in humans. Traits
located on the X-chromosome.
 sexual
reproduction  A system of reproduction in which two
haploid
sex cells (gametes)
fuse to produce a diploid
zygote.
 shoot  The
plant stem; provides support for the leaves and þowers; one of
the three major plant organs; also referred to as the shoot system.
 short-day
plants  Plants that þower during early spring or
fall when nights are relatively long and days are short; e.g.,
poinsettia and dandelions. sickle cell
anemia  Human autosomal
recessive
disease that causes production of abnormal red
blood cells that collapse (or sickle) and
cause circulatory problems. sieve cells
Conducting cells in the phloem
of vascular plants. See
sieve elements sieve
elements  Tubular, thin-walled cells that form a system
of tubes extending from the roots to the leaves in the
phloem
of plants; lose their nuclei and organelles at maturity, but retain a
functional plasma membrane. 
1 
2 sieve
plates  Pores in the end walls of sieve elements that
connect the sieve elements together. The end walls of sieve tube
cells that are perforated (sieves).  sieve tube
members Phloem
cells that form long sieve tubes. See
sieve elements. silica  Silicon
dioxide. Silurian
Period The geological
time period of the Paleozoic
Era following the Ordovician, between 435
and 395 million years ago, when plants colonized the land.
 simple leaf  A
leaf in which the blade does not form leaflets. sink  A body or
process that acts as a storage device or disposal mechanism; e.g.,
plants and the oceans act as sinks absorbing atmospheric carbon
dioxide. Also, a location in a plant where sugar is being consumed,
either in metabolism
or by conversion to starch. sinoatrial
(SA) node  A region of modiÞed muscle cells in
the right atrium
that sends timed impulses to the heart's other muscle cells, causing
them to contract; the heart's pacemaker.  sister
chromatids  Chromatids
joined by a common centromere
and carrying identical genetic information (unless crossing-over has
occurred).  sleep
movement  In legumes, the movement of the leaves in
response to daily rhythms of dark and light. The leaves are
horizontal in daylight and folded vertically at night. skeletal
muscle  Muscle that is generally attached to the
skeleton
and causes body parts to move; consists of muscle
Þbers. Voluntary muscle cells that
have a striated appearance. These muscles control skeletal movements
and are normally under conscious control.  skeletal
system  One of eleven major body organ
systems in animals; supports the body,
protects internal organs, and, with the muscular system, allows
movement and locomotion.  skin  One of
eleven major body organ
systems in animals; the outermost layer
protecting multicellular animals from the loss or exchange of
internal þuids and from invasion by foreign microorganisms;
composed of two layers: the epidermis
and dermis.
 sliding
filament model  Model of muscular contraction in which
the actin
Þlaments in the sarcomere
slide past the myosin
Þlaments, shortening the sarcomere and therefore the muscle.

1 | 
2 | 
3 | 
4 slime molds 
Protistans that may represent a transition between protistans and
fungi. small
intestine  A coiled tube in the abdominal cavity that
is the major site of chemical digestion and absorption of nutrients;
composed of the duodenum,
jejunum,
and ileum.
 smog  A local
alteration in the atmosphere caused by human activity; mainly an
urban problem that is often due to pollutants produced by fuel
combustion. smooth
muscle  Muscle that lacks striations; found around
circulatory
system vessels and in the walls of such
organs as the stomach, intestines, and bladder. Involuntary, not
striated cells that control autonomic
functions such as digestion and artery contraction.  social
behavior  Behavior that takes place in a social context
and results from the interaction between and among
individuals. societies  The
most highly organized type of social organization; consist of
individuals that show varying degrees of cooperation and
communication with one another; often have a rigid division of
labor. sodium-potassium
pump The mechanism that uses ATP
energy to reset the sodium and potassium ions after transmission of a
nerve impulse. soil  Weathered rocks and
minerals combined with air, water and organic matter that can support
plants. somatic  Relating
to the non-gonadal tissues and organs of an organism's
body. somatic cell  A
cell that is not or will not become a gamete;
the cells of the body. somatic
senses  All senses except vision, hearing, taste, and
smell; include pain, temperature, and pressure. somatic
nervous system  The portion of the peripheral
nervous system consisting of the
motor
neuron pathways that innervate
skeletal
muscles. somatostatin
Pancreatic hormone
that controls the rate of nutrient absorption into the
bloodstream. somites  Mesodermal
structures formed during embryonic development that give rise to
segmented body parts such as the muscles of the body wall. special
senses  Vision, hearing, taste, and smell. species  One
or more populations of interbreeding or potentially interbreeding
organisms that are reproductively isolated in nature from all other
organisms. Populations of individuals capable of interbreeding and
producing viable, fertile offspring. The least inclusive
taxonomic
category commonly used.  species
diversity  The number of living species on
Earth. species
packing  The phenomenon in which present-day
communities generally contain more species than earlier communities
because organisms have evolved more adaptations over time. species
richness  The number of species present in a
community. sperm  The
male gamete.
 spermatogenesis
The development of sperm cells from spermatocytes to mature sperm,
including meiosis.
 spicules  Needle-shaped
skeletal elements in sponges that occur in the matrix between the
epidermal
and collar cells. spinal
cord  A cylinder of nerve tissue extending from the
brain stem; receives sensory information and sends output motor
signals; with the brain, forms the central
nervous system. Nerve cell collections
extending from the base of the brain to just below the last rib
vertebrae. spindle
apparatus Microtubule
construction that aligns and segregates chromosomes
during eukaryotic cell division.  spleen  An organ that
produces lymphocytes
and stores erythrocytes. spongy
bone  The inner layer of bone; found at the ends of
long bones and is less dense than compact bone. Some spongy bone
contains red marrow. spongy
mesophyll Parenchyma
cells found in plant leaves that are irregularly shaped and have
large intracellular spaces. 
1 | 
2 sporangia  The
structures in which spores are produced (sing.:
sporangium). spores  Impervious
structures formed by some cells that encapsulate the cells and
protect them from the environment; haploid
cells that can survive unfavorable conditions and germinate into new
haploid individuals or act as gametes
in fertilization. sporophyte  The
diploid
stage of a plant exhibiting alternation
of generations. The diploid, spore
producing phase of the plant life cycle.  Sporozoans  Members
of the protists that are referred to as slime molds; may include
organisms resembling the ancestors of fungi. stability  One
of the phases of a population's life cycle. The population's size
remains roughly constant, þuctuating around some average
density. Also, the ability of a community to persist
unchanged. stabilizing
selection  A process of natural
selection that tends to favor genotypic
combinations that produce an intermediate phenotype; selection
against the extremes in variation.  stalk  A leaf's
petiole;
the slender stem that supports the blade of a leaf and attaches it to
a larger stem of the plant. stamens  The
male reproductive structures of a þower; usually consist of
slender, thread-like filaments
topped by anthers.
The male reproductive structures in the flower, composed of a
filament and anther.  stapes One of the three
bones that function in hearing.  start
codon  The codon
(AUG) on a messenger
RNA molecule where protein synthesis
begins. steinkerns Internal
casts
of a fossil.
Steinkerns may reveal internal anatomy of an organism, such as muscle
attachment, and other details of soft tissue structure.
 stem
cells  Cells in bone marrow that produce
lymphocytes
by mitotic division. sternum  The
breastbone. steroids  Compounds
with a skeleton of four rings of carbon to which various side groups
are attached; one of the three main classes of hormones.
 sticky ends Term
applied to DNA
sequences cut with restriction
enzymes where the cuts will bond with each
other or with another sequence cut with the same enzyme. stigma  Part
of the female reproductive structure of the carpel
of a þower; the sticky surface at the tip of the
style
to which pollen
grains attach. The receptive surface of
the pistil
(of the flower) on which pollen is placed by a pollinator.

1 | 
2 stimulus  A
physical or chemical change in the environment that leads to a
response controlled by the nervous system. stolons Stems that grow
along the surface of the ground; a method of plant vegetaive
propagation. stomach  The
muscular organ between the esophagus
and small
intestine that stores, mixes, and digests
food and controls the passage of food into the small intestine.
 stomata  Pores
on the underside of leaves that can be opened or closed to control
gas exchange and water loss. Openings in the epidermis
(usually of the leaf) that allow gas exchange. 
1 | 
2 stomatal
apparatus The stomata and guard
cells that control the size of the stoma.

1 | 
2 stop
codon  The codon
on a messenger
RNA molecule where protein synthesis
stops. stratification  The
division of water in lakes and ponds into layers with different
temperatures and oxygen content. Oxygen content declines with depth,
while the uppermost layer is warmest in summer and coolest in
winter. stressed
community  A community that is disturbed by human
activity, such as road building or pollution, and is inadvertently
simpliÞed. Some species become superabundant while others
disappear. stroma  The
matrix surrounding the grana
in the inner membrane of chloroplasts.
The area between membranes (thylakoids,
grana) inside the chloroplast.  stromatolite A
sedimentological and biological "fossil" representinmg colonies of
bacteria altenating with layers of sediments. Becoming more common
during the Proterozoic, stromatolites persist today in marine
environments where grazing by herbivorous organisms is limited.

1 | 
2 style  Part of
the female reproductive structure in the carpel
of a þower; formed from the ovary
wall. The tip of the style carries the stigma
to which pollen
grains attach. Part of the pistil that
separates the stigma from the ovary. 
1 | 
2 subatomic
particles  The three kinds of particles that make up
atoms: protons, neutrons, and electrons. suberin Waxy,
waterproof chemical in some plant cells, notably cork (in stems) and
endodermis
cells (in roots). subspecies  A
taxonomic
subdivision of a species; a population of a particular region
genetically distinguishable from other such populations and capable
of interbreeding with them. substitution A
type of mutation
in which one base is substituted for another. substrate
feeders  Animals such as earthworms or termites that
eat the soil or wood through which they burrow. sudden
infant death syndrome (SIDS)  A disorder resulting in
the unexpected death during sleep of infants, usually between the
ages of two weeks and one year. The causes are not fully understood,
but are believed to involve failure of automatic respiratory
control. superior vena
cava Blood from the head returns to the heart through this main
vein. suppressor T
cells  T
cells that slow down and stop the immune
response of B
cells and other T cells. Immune system
cells that shut off the antibody
production when an infection is under control. suprachiasmic
nucleus (SCN)  A region of the hypothalamus
that controls internal cycles of endocrine
secretion. symbiosis  An
interactive association between two or more species living together;
may be parasitic,
commensal,
or mutualistic.
The relationship between two organisms. sympathetic
system  The subdivision of the autonomic
nervous system that dominates in stressful
or emergency situations and prepares the body for strenuous physical
activity, e.g., causing the heart to beat faster. synapse  The
junction between an axon
and an adjacent neuron.
 synapsis  The
alignment of chromosomes
during meiosis
I so that each chromosome is beside its homologue. synaptic
cleft  The space between the end of a neuron
and an adjacent cell. synaptic
vesicles  Vesicles at the synapse end of an axon
that contain the neurotransmitters.
 synergid Cells in the
embryo
sac of angiosperms
that flank the egg cell. The pollen
tube grows through one (usually the
smaller) of the synergids.  synovial
joint  The most movable type of joint. The bones are
covered by connective tissue, the interior of which is Þlled
with synovial þuid, and the ends of the bones are covered with
cartilage. syphilis  A
sexually transmitted disease caused by a bacterial infection that
produces an ulcer on the genitals and can have potentially serious
effects if untreated. systematics  The
classiÞcation of organisms based on information from
observations and experiments; includes the reconstruction of
evolutionary relatedness among living organisms. Currently, a system
that divides organisms into Þve kingdoms (Monera, Protista,
Plantae, Fungi, Animalia) is widely used. systemic
circuit  The loop of the circulatory
system that carries blood through the body
and back to the heart.  systole  The
contraction of the ventricles
that opens the semilunar
valve and forces blood into the
arteries.
 systolic
pressure  The peak blood pressure when ventricles contract.
 



biome  The region of coniferous forest extending across
much of northern Europe, Asia, and North America; characterized by
long, cold winters and short, cool summers and by acidic, thin
soils. tap
root  A primary root that grows vertically downward and
gives off small lateral roots; occurs in dicots.
Root system in plants characterized by one root longer than the other
roots. Example: carrot. target cell  A
cell that a particular hormone
effects by its direct action (either passing through the membrane or
binding to a surface receptor). 
1 | 
2 tarsals  The
bones that make up the ankle joint.  taxis  The
behavior when an animal turns and moves toward or away from an
external stimulus (pl.: taxes). taxon Term applied group
of organisms comprising a given taxonomic category taxonomy  A
systematic method of classifying plants and animals. Classification
of organisms based on degrees of similarity purportedly representing
evolutionary (phylogenetic) relatedness. T
cells  The type of lymphocyte
responsible for cell-mediated
immunity; also protects against infection
by parasites, fungi, and protozoans and can kill cancerous cells;
circulate in the blood and become associated with lymph
nodes and the spleen. tectonic plates
Segments of the lithosphere that comprise the surface of the
Earth much the way a turtle shell is composed of its
plates. telophase  The
Þnal stage of mitosis
in which the chromosomes
migrate to opposite poles, a new nuclear envelope forms, and the
chromosomes uncoil. The last phase of nuclear division in
eukaryotes
when the segregated chromosomes uncoil and begin to reform nuclei.
This is immediately followed (in most cases) by cytokinesis.

 temperate
forest biome  Extends across regions of the northern
hemisphere with abundant rainfall and long growing seasons.
Deciduous, broad-leaved trees are the dominant plants. template strand
The strand of DNA
that is transcribed
to make RNA.
 temporal
lobe  The lobe of the cerebral
cortex that is responsible for processing
auditory signals.  tendons  Bundles
of connective tissue that link muscle to bone. Fibrous connective
tissue that connects muscle to bone.  terminal buds
Buds located at the end of a plant shoot. termination  The
end of translation;
occurs when the ribosome
reaches the stop
codon on the messenger
RNA molecule and the polypeptide, the
messenger RNA, and the transfer
RNA molecule are released from the
ribosome.  termination
codon One of three three-base sequences that initiate termination
of the protein synthesis process. See stop
codon.  tertiary
structure  The folding of a protein's secondary
structure into a functional
three-dimensional conÞguration. Shape assumed by protein due to
interactions between amino acids far apart on the chain.
 test cross Genetic
crossing of an organism with known genotype
(one that exhibits the recessive
phenotype)
with an individual expressing the dominant
phenotype but of unknown heritage. testes  The
male gonad;
produce spermatozoa and male sex
hormones. Male gonads in mammals.
Singular, testis. Paired organs that contain seminiferous
tubules in which sperm
are produced. 
1 | 
2 testosterone  Male
sex
hormone that stimulates sperm
formation, promotes the development of the male duct system in the
fetus, and is responsible for secondary sex characteristics such as
facial hair growth.  tetrad  The
four chromatids
in each cluster during synapsis;
formed by the two sister chromatids in each of the two
homologous
chromosomes.  thalamus  The
brain region that serves as a switching center for sensory signals
passing from the brain stem to other brain regions; part of the
diencephalon.
 thecodonts An
informal term for a variety of Permian
and Triassic reptiles that had teeth set in individual sockets.
Small, bipedal thecodontians are the probable ancestors of
dinosaurs. theory  A
hypothesis
that has withstood extensive testing by a variety of methods, and in
which a higher degree of certainty may be placed. A theory is NEVER a
fact, but instead is an attempt to explain one or more facts.
 thermacidophiles
 A group of archaebacteria
that are able to tolerate high temperatures and acidic pH. thermiogenesis  The
generation of heat by raising the body's metabolic rate; controlled
by the hypothalamus. thermoregulation  The
regulation of body temperature. thigmotropism  Plants'
response to contact with a solid object; e.g., tendrils' twining
around a pole. Plant response to touch. thoracic
cavity  The chest cavity in which the heart and lungs
are located. thorax  In
many arthropods, one of three regions formed by the fusion of the
segments (others are the head and abdomen). thorns  Stems modified
to protect the plant. thoroughfare
channels  Shortcuts within the capillary
network that allow blood to bypass a capillary
bed.  thylakoids  The
specialized membrane structures in which photosynthesis
takes place. Internal membranes in the chloroplast
where the light
reaction chemicals are embedded.
Collections of thylakoids form the grana.
 thymine  One of the
pyrimidine
bases in DNA,
thymine is replaced by uracil
in RNA. thyroid-stimulating
hormone  A hormone
produced by the anterior pituitary
that stimulates the production and release of thyroid
hormones. tight
junctions  Junctions between the plasma membranes of
adjacent cells in animals that form a barrier, preventing materials
from passing between the cells. tissues  Groups
of similar cells organized to carry out one or more speciÞc
functions. Groups of cells performing a function in a multicellular
organism. toxins Term applied to
poisons in living systems. trace
fossil  Any indication of prehistoric organic activity,
such as tracks, trails, burrows, or nests.  trachea  In
insects and spiders, a series of tubes that carry air directly to
cells for gas exchange; in humans, the air-conducting duct that leads
from the pharynx
to the lungs. 
1 | 
2 tracheids  Long,
tapered cells with pitted walls that form a system of tubes in the
xylem
and carry water and solutes from the roots to the rest of the plant.
One type of xylem cells. Tracheids are long and relatively narrow,
and transport materials from the roots upward. Tracheids are dead at
maturity and have lignin
in their secondary walls. 
1 | 
2 transcription  The
synthesis of RNA
from a DNA
template. The making of RNA from one strand of the DNA molecule.
 transfer
RNAs (tRNAs)  Small, single-stranded RNA
molecules that bind to amino
acids and deliver them to the proper
codon
on messenger
RNA. The trucks of protein synthesis that
carry the specified amino acid to the ribosome.
Abbreviated tRNA.  transformation  In
GrifÞth's experiments with strains of pneumonia bacterium, the
process by which hereditary information passed from dead cells of one
strain into cells of another strain, causing them to take on the
characteristic virulence of the Þrst strain. transforming
factor  GrifÞth's name for the unknown material
leading to transformation; later found to be DNA. transition
reaction  Biochemical process of converting 3-carbon pyruvate
into 2-carbon acetyl and attaching it to coenzyme A (CoA) so it can
enter Kreb's
cycle. Carbon dioxide is also released and
NADH is formed (from NAD and H) in this process. translation  The
synthesis of protein on a template of messenger
RNA; consists of three steps:
initiation,
elongation,
and termination.
Making of a polypeptide sequence by translating the genetic
code of an mRNA molecule associated with a
ribosome.

 translocation  1)
The movement of a segment from one chromosome
to another without altering the number of chromosomes. 2) the
movement of þuids through the phloem
from one part of a plant to another, with the direction of movement
depending on the pressure gradients between source and sink regions.
 transpiration  The
loss of water molecules from the leaves of a plant; creates an
osmotic gradient; producing tension that pulls water upward from the
roots. 
1 | 
2 | 
3  Triassic
Period The first period of the Mesozoic
Era between 225 and 185 million years ago.
Pangaea began to breakup during this time. The ancestors of dinosaurs
were present, as were early mammals and mammal-like reptiles.
 trichomes Extensions
from the epidermis
of the plant that provide shade and protection for the
plant. trichocysts  Barbed,
thread-like organelles of ciliated protozoans that can be discharged
for defense or to capture prey. trilobites  A group
of benthonic, detritus-feeding, extinct marine invertebrate animals
(phylum Arthropoda), having skeletons of an organic compound called
chitin.
Trilobites appear in abundance early in the Cambrian period and were
dominant animals in the Burgess Shale fauna, before finally becoming
extinct at the end of the Permian period.   triplet  Three-base
sequence of mRNA
that codes for a specific amino
acid or termination
codon.  trisomy A condition
where a cell has an extra chromosome. trophoblast  The
outer layer of cells of a blastocyst
that adhere to the endometrium
during implantation. tropical
rain forest biome  The most complex and diverse
biome;
found near the equator in South America and Africa; characterized by
thin soils, heavy rainfall, and little þuctuation in
temperature. tropic hormone
Hormone
made by one gland that causes another gland to secrete a
hormone. tropism  The
movement of plant parts toward or away from a stimulus in the plant's
environment. Plant movement in response to an environmental stimulus.
 true-breeding  Occurs
when self-fertilization gives rise to the same traits in all
offspring, generation after generation. Now interpreted as equivalent
to homozygous.
 trypanosomes A
type of roundworm, responsible for human disease associated with
eating raw or undercooked pork. tubal
ligation  A contraceptive procedure in women in which
the oviducts
are cut, preventing the ova from reaching the uterus. tubal
pregnancy  Occurs when the morula
remains in the oviduct and does not descend into the uterus. tube-within-a-tube
system  A type of body plan in animals. The organism
has two openings&emdash;one for food and one for the elimination of
waste&emdash;and a specialized digestive
system. tube nucleus 
One of the cells in the male gametophyte
in seed plants. The tube nucleus grows through the stigma,
style,
and into the ovule,
clearing the way for the sperm nuclei to enter the embryo
sac.  tubers  Swollen
underground stems in plants that store food, such as the irish
potato. tubular
secretion  The process in which ions and other waste
products are transported into the distal
tubules of the nephron. tubulins  The
protein subunits from which microtubules are assembled. tumor
suppressor genes  Genes that normally keep cell
division under control, preventing the cell from responding to
internal and external commands to divide. tundra
biome  Extensive treeless plain across northern Europe,
Asia, and North American between the taiga to the south and the
permanent ice to the north. Much of the soil remains frozen in
permafrost, and grasses and other vegetation support herds of large
grazing mammals. turgor
pressure Pressure caused by the cytoplasm pressing against the
cell wall. Turner
syndrome  In humans, a genetically determined condition
in which an individual has only one sex
chromosome (an X). Affected individuals
are always female and are typically short and infertile. 



umbilical
cord  The structure that connects the placenta
and the embryo; contains the umbilical arteries and the umbilical
vein. unicellular  Single-celled. uniformitarianism  The
idea that geological processes have remained uniform over time and
that slight changes over long periods can have large-scale
consequences; proposed by James Hutton in 1795 and reÞned by
Charles Lyell during the 1800s. The principle on which modern
geology was founded: processes operating today on the earth operated
in much the same way in the geologic past. Sometimes expressed as
"the present is the key to the past". uninucleate  Term
applied to cells having only a single nucleus. unsaturated
fat A triglyceride with double coavent
bonds between some carbon atoms.
 uracil The
pyrimidine
that replaces thymine
in RNA
molecules and nucleotides. ureter  A
muscular tube that transports urine by peristaltic contractions from
the kidney to the bladder.
 urethra  A
narrow tube that transports urine from the bladder
to the outside of the body. In males, it also conducts sperm and
semen to the outside.  urine  Fluid
containing various wastes that is produced in the kidney and excreted
from the bladder. uterus  The
organ that houses and nourishes the developing embryo and fetus. 
The womb. Female reproductive organ in which the fertilized egg
implants.  



vaccination  The
process of protecting against infectious disease by introducing into
the body a vaccine that stimulates a primary immune response and the
production of memory cells against the disease-causing
agent. vaccine A
preparation containing dead or weakened pathogens that when injected
into the body elicit an immune response. vacuoles  Membrane-bound
þuid-Þlled spaces in plant and animal cells that remove
waste products and store ingested food.  vagina  The
tubular organ that is the site of sperm deposition and also serves as
the birth canal.  vascular
bundle Groups of xylem,
phloem
and cambium
cells in stems of plants descended from the procambium embryonic
tissue layer. vascular
cambium  A layer of lateral meristematic
tissue between the xylem
and phloem
in the stems of woody plants. Lateral meristem tissue in plants that
produces secondary growth. vascular
cylinder  A central column formed by the vascular
tissue of a plant root; surrounded by parenchymal ground
tissue. vascular
parenchyma  Specialized parenchyma cells in the phloem
of plants. vascular plants
 Group of plants having lignified conducting tissue (xylem
vessels or tracheids). vascular
system  Specialized tissues for transporting
þuids and nutrients in plants; also plays a role in supporting
the plant; one of the four main tissue systems in plants. vas
deferens  The duct that carries sperm from the
epididymis to the ejaculatory duct and urethra. The tube
connecting the testes with the urethra. vasectomy  A
contraceptive procedure in men in which the vas deferens is cut and
the cut ends are sealed to prevent the transportation of sperm.
Surgical separation of the vas deferens so that sperm, while still
produced, do not leave the body. vasopressin  See
antidiuretic hormone. vectors  Self-replicating
DNA molecules that can be joined with DNA fragments to form
recombinant DNA molecules. veins  Thin-walled
vessels that carry blood to the heart. Units of the circulatory
system that carry blood to the heart. ventilation  The
mechanics of breathing in and out through the use of the diaphragm
and muscles in the wall of the thoracic cavity. ventral Term applied to
the lower side of a fish, or to the chest of a land vertebrate.
 ventricle  The
chamber of the heart that pumps the blood into the blood vessels that
carry it away from the heart. The lower chamber of the heart through
which blood leaves the heart. venules  The
smallest veins. Blood þows into them from the capillary beds.
Small veins that connect a vein with capillaries. vernalization  ArtiÞcial
exposure of seeds or seedlings to cold to enable the plant to
þower. vertebrae  The
segments of the spinal column; separated by disks made of connective
tissue (sing.: vertebra). vertebrate  Any
animal having a segmented vertebral column; members of the subphylum
Vertebrata; include reptiles, Þshes, mammals, and
birds. vesicles  Small
membrane-bound spaces in most plant and animal cells that transport
macromolecules into and out of the cell and carry materials between
organelles in the cell. vessel
elements  Short, wide cells arranged end to end,
forming a system of tubes in the xylem that moves water and solutes
from the roots to the rest of the plant. Large diameter cells of the
xylem that are extremely specialized and efficient at conduction. An
evolutionary advance over tracheids. Most angiosperms have
vessels. vestigial
structures  Nonfunctional remains of organs that were
functional in ancestral species and may still be functional in
related species; e.g., the dewclaws of dogs. villi  Finger-like
projections of the lining of the small intestine that increase the
surface area available for absorption. Also, projections of the
chorion that extend into cavities Þlled with maternal blood and
allow the exchange of nutrients between the maternal and embryonic
circulations. Projections of the inner layer of the small intestine
that increase the surface area for absorbtion of food. viroids  Infective
forms of nucleic acid without a protective coat of protein;
unencapsulated single-stranded RNA molecules. Naked RNA, possibly of
degenerated virus, that infects plants. virus  Infectious
chemical agent composed of a nucleic acid (DNA or RNA) inside a
protein coat. vitamins  A
diverse group of organic molecules that are required for metabolic
reactions and generally cannot be synthesized in the body. vulva  A
collective term for the external genitals in women. 



white blood cell
 Component of the blood that functions in the immune system. Also
known as a leukocyte. wood  The inner
layer of the stems of woody plants; composed of xylem. X-chromosome One
of the sex chromosomes. xerophytic
leaves  The leaves of plants that grow under arid
conditions with low levels of soil and water. Usually characterized
by water-conserving features such as thick cuticle and sunken
stomatal pits.  x-ray
diffraction  Technique utilized to study atomic structure of
crystalline substances by noting the patterns produced by x-rays shot
through the crystal.  xylem  Tissue
in the vascular system of plants that moves water and dissolved
nutrients from the roots to the leaves; composed of various cell
types including tracheids and vessel elements. Plant tissue type that
conducts water and nutrients from the roots to the leaves. zebroid  A
hybrid animal that results from breeding zebras and
horses. Z
lines  Dense areas in myoÞbrils that mark the
beginning of the sarcomeres. The actin Þlaments of the
sarcomeres are anchored in the Z lines. zone of
differentiation Area in plant roots where recently produced cells
develop into different cell types. zone of
elongation Area in plant roots where recently produced cells grow
and elongate prior to differentiation. zone of
intolerance  The area outside the geographic range
where a population is absent; grades into the zone of physiological science
stress. zone science
of physiological stress  The area in a population's
geographic range where members of population are rare due to physical
and biological limiting factors. zygomycetes One of
the division of the fungi, characterized by the production of
zygospores; includes the bread molds. zygospore  In
fungi, a structure that forms from the diploid zygote created by the
fusion of haploid hyphae of different mating types. After a period of
dormancy, the zygospore forms sporangia, where meiosis occurs and
spores form. zygote  A
fertilized egg. A diploid cell resulting from fertilization of an egg
by a sperm cell. 



